A spectre is haunting Europe—the spectre of Communism. All the Powers
of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise this
spectre: Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals and
German police-spies.

Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as
Communistic by its opponents in power? Where is the Opposition that has
not hurled back the branding reproach of Communism, against the more
advanced opposition parties, as well as against its reactionary
adversaries?

Two things result from this fact.
Communism is already acknowledged by all European Powers to be
itself a Power.
It is high time that Communists should openly, in the face of the
whole world, publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, and
meet this nursery tale of the Spectre of Communism with a Manifesto of
the party itself.

To this end, Communists of various nationalities have assembled in
London, and sketched the following Manifesto, to be published in the
English, French, German, Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.


BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS


The history of all hitherto existing societies is the history of class
struggles.

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master
and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant
opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now
open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary
re-constitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the
contending classes.

In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a
complicated arrangement of society into various orders, a manifold
gradation of social rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians, knights,
plebeians, slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals,
guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices, serfs; in almost all of these
classes, again, subordinate gradations.

The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal
society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but
established new classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms of
struggle in place of the old ones. Our epoch, the epoch of the
bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive feature: it has
simplified the class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more
splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes,
directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.

From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers of the
earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the
bourgeoisie were developed.

The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh
ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets,
the colonisation of America, trade with the colonies, the increase in
the means of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to commerce,
to navigation, to industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby,
to the revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid
development.

The feudal system of industry, under which industrial production was
monopolised by closed guilds, now no longer sufficed for the growing
wants of the new markets. The manufacturing system took its place. The
guild-masters were pushed on one side by the manufacturing middle
class; division of labour between the different corporate guilds
vanished in the face of division of labour in each single workshop.

Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising. Even
manufacture no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and machinery
revolutionised industrial production. The place of manufacture was
taken by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of the industrial middle
class, by industrial millionaires, the leaders of whole industrial
armies, the modern bourgeois.

Modern industry has established the world-market, for which the
discovery of America paved the way. This market has given an immense
development to commerce, to navigation, to communication by land. This
development has, in its time, reacted on the extension of industry; and
in proportion as industry, commerce, navigation, railways extended, in
the same proportion the bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital,
and pushed into the background every class handed down from the Middle
Ages.

We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product of
a long course of development, of a series of revolutions in the modes
of production and of exchange.

Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a
corresponding political advance of that class. An oppressed class under
the sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and self-governing
association in the mediaeval commune; here independent urban republic
(as in Italy and Germany), there taxable “third estate” of the monarchy
(as in France), afterwards, in the period of manufacture proper,
serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a
counterpoise against the nobility, and, in fact, corner-stone of the
great monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie has at last, since the
establishment of Modern Industry and of the world-market, conquered for
itself, in the modern representative State, exclusive political sway.
The executive of the modern State is but a committee for managing the
common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.

The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary part.

The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end to
all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn
asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his “natural
superiors,” and has left remaining no other nexus between man and man
than naked self-interest, than callous “cash payment.” It has drowned
the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour, of chivalrous
enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of
egotistical calculation. It has resolved personal worth into exchange
value, and in place of the numberless and indefeasible chartered
freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable freedom—Free Trade. In
one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and political
illusions, naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.

The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto
honoured and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the
physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into
its paid wage labourers.

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil, and
has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation.

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal
display of vigour in the Middle Ages, which Reactionists so much
admire, found its fitting complement in the most slothful indolence. It
has been the first to show what man’s activity can bring about. It has
accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts,
and Gothic cathedrals; it has conducted expeditions that put in the
shade all former Exoduses of nations and crusades.

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the
instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production, and
with them the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modes
of production in unaltered form, was, on the contrary, the first
condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant
revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social
conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the
bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen
relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and
opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before
they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is
profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses, his
real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind.

The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the
bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It must nestle
everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connexions everywhere.

The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world-market given
a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every
country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn from under
the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All
old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily
being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries, whose
introduction becomes a life and death question for all civilised
nations, by industries that no longer work up indigenous raw material,
but raw material drawn from the remotest zones; industries whose
products are consumed, not only at home, but in every quarter of the
globe. In place of the old wants, satisfied by the productions of the
country, we find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction the
products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and
national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every
direction, universal inter-dependence of nations. And as in material,
so also in intellectual production. The intellectual creations of
individual nations become common property. National one-sidedness and
narrow-mindedness become more and more impossible, and from the
numerous national and local literatures, there arises a world
literature.

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of
production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws
all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilisation. The cheap
prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters
down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians’ intensely
obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations,
on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it
compels them to introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst,
_i.e_., to become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world
after its own image.

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. It
has created enormous cities, has greatly increased the urban population
as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part of
the population from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it has made the
country dependent on the towns, so it has made barbarian and
semi-barbarian countries dependent on the civilised ones, nations of
peasants on nations of bourgeois, the East on the West.

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scattered state
of the population, of the means of production, and of property. It has
agglomerated production, and has concentrated property in a few hands.
The necessary consequence of this was political centralisation.
Independent, or but loosely connected provinces, with separate
interests, laws, governments and systems of taxation, became lumped
together into one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one
national class-interest, one frontier and one customs-tariff. The
bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created
more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all
preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man,
machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture,
steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole
continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations
conjured out of the ground—what earlier century had even a presentiment
that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?

We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose
foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal
society. At a certain stage in the development of these means of
production and of exchange, the conditions under which feudal society
produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of agriculture and
manufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal relations of property
became no longer compatible with the already developed productive
forces; they became so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder; they
were burst asunder.

Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social and
political constitution adapted to it, and by the economical and
political sway of the bourgeois class.

A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern bourgeois
society with its relations of production, of exchange and of property,
a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of production and of
exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer able to control the
powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells. For
many a decade past the history of industry and commerce is but the
history of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern
conditions of production, against the property relations that are the
conditions for the existence of the bourgeoisie and of its rule. It is
enough to mention the commercial crises that by their periodical return
put on its trial, each time more threateningly, the existence of the
entire bourgeois society. In these crises a great part not only of the
existing products, but also of the previously created productive
forces, are periodically destroyed. In these crises there breaks out an
epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would have seemed an
absurdity—the epidemic of over-production. Society suddenly finds
itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism; it appears as if a
famine, a universal war of devastation had cut off the supply of every
means of subsistence; industry and commerce seem to be destroyed; and
why? Because there is too much civilisation, too much means of
subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce. The productive
forces at the disposal of society no longer tend to further the
development of the conditions of bourgeois property; on the contrary,
they have become too powerful for these conditions, by which they are
fettered, and so soon as they overcome these fetters, they bring
disorder into the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the existence of
bourgeois property. The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow
to comprise the wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie
get over these crises? On the one hand inforced destruction of a mass
of productive forces; on the other, by the conquest of new markets, and
by the more thorough exploitation of the old ones. That is to say, by
paving the way for more extensive and more destructive crises, and by
diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the ground
are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring death to
itself; it has also called into existence the men who are to wield
those weapons—the modern working class—the proletarians.

In proportion as the bourgeoisie, _i.e_., capital, is developed, in the
same proportion is the proletariat, the modern working class,
developed—a class of labourers, who live only so long as they find
work, and who find work only so long as their labour increases capital.
These labourers, who must sell themselves piece-meal, are a commodity,
like every other article of commerce, and are consequently exposed to
all the vicissitudes of competition, to all the fluctuations of the
market.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division of labour, the
work of the proletarians has lost all individual character, and
consequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of the
machine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and most
easily acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the cost of
production of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the means of
subsistence that he requires for his maintenance, and for the
propagation of his race. But the price of a commodity, and therefore
also of labour, is equal to its cost of production. In proportion
therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the wage
decreases. Nay more, in proportion as the use of machinery and division
of labour increases, in the same proportion the burden of toil also
increases, whether by prolongation of the working hours, by increase of
the work exacted in a given time or by increased speed of the
machinery, etc.

Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal
master into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses of
labourers, crowded into the factory, are organised like soldiers. As
privates of the industrial army they are placed under the command of a
perfect hierarchy of officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves
of the bourgeois class, and of the bourgeois State; they are daily and
hourly enslaved by the machine, by the over-looker, and, above all, by
the individual bourgeois manufacturer himself. The more openly this
despotism proclaims gain to be its end and aim, the more petty, the
more hateful and the more embittering it is.

The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual labour,
in other words, the more modern industry becomes developed, the more is
the labour of men superseded by that of women. Differences of age and
sex have no longer any distinctive social validity for the working
class. All are instruments of labour, more or less expensive to use,
according to their age and sex.

No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer, so
far at an end, that he receives his wages in cash, than he is set upon
by the other portions of the bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper,
the pawnbroker, etc.

The lower strata of the middle class—the small tradespeople,
shopkeepers, retired tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and
peasants—all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly because
their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which Modern
Industry is carried on, and is swamped in the competition with the
large capitalists, partly because their specialized skill is rendered
worthless by the new methods of production. Thus the proletariat is
recruited from all classes of the population.

The proletariat goes through various stages of development. With its
birth begins its struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first the contest is
carried on by individual labourers, then by the workpeople of a
factory, then by the operatives of one trade, in one locality, against
the individual bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct their
attacks not against the bourgeois conditions of production, but against
the instruments of production themselves; they destroy imported wares
that compete with their labour, they smash to pieces machinery, they
set factories ablaze, they seek to restore by force the vanished status
of the workman of the Middle Ages.

At this stage the labourers still form an incoherent mass scattered
over the whole country, and broken up by their mutual competition. If
anywhere they unite to form more compact bodies, this is not yet the
consequence of their own active union, but of the union of the
bourgeoisie, which class, in order to attain its own political ends, is
compelled to set the whole proletariat in motion, and is moreover yet,
for a time, able to do so. At this stage, therefore, the proletarians
do not fight their enemies, but the enemies of their enemies, the
remnants of absolute monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial
bourgeois, the petty bourgeoisie. Thus the whole historical movement is
concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained
is a victory for the bourgeoisie.

But with the development of industry the proletariat not only increases
in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses, its strength
grows, and it feels that strength more. The various interests and
conditions of life within the ranks of the proletariat are more and
more equalised, in proportion as machinery obliterates all distinctions
of labour, and nearly everywhere reduces wages to the same low level.
The growing competition among the bourgeois, and the resulting
commercial crises, make the wages of the workers ever more fluctuating.
The unceasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing,
makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions between
individual workmen and individual bourgeois take more and more the
character of collisions between two classes. Thereupon the workers
begin to form combinations (Trades Unions) against the bourgeois; they
club together in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found
permanent associations in order to make provision beforehand for these
occasional revolts. Here and there the contest breaks out into riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The real
fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in the
ever-expanding union of the workers. This union is helped on by the
improved means of communication that are created by modern industry and
that place the workers of different localities in contact with one
another. It was just this contact that was needed to centralise the
numerous local struggles, all of the same character, into one national
struggle between classes. But every class struggle is a political
struggle. And that union, to attain which the burghers of the Middle
Ages, with their miserable highways, required centuries, the modern
proletarians, thanks to railways, achieve in a few years.

This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and consequently
into a political party, is continually being upset again by the
competition between the workers themselves. But it ever rises up again,
stronger, firmer, mightier. It compels legislative recognition of
particular interests of the workers, by taking advantage of the
divisions among the bourgeoisie itself. Thus the ten-hours’ bill in
England was carried.

Altogether collisions between the classes of the old society further,
in many ways, the course of development of the proletariat. The
bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a constant battle. At first with
the aristocracy; later on, with those portions of the bourgeoisie
itself, whose interests have become antagonistic to the progress of
industry; at all times, with the bourgeoisie of foreign countries. In
all these battles it sees itself compelled to appeal to the
proletariat, to ask for its help, and thus, to drag it into the
political arena. The bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies the
proletariat with its own instruments of political and general
education, in other words, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons
for fighting the bourgeoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling classes
are, by the advance of industry, precipitated into the proletariat, or
are at least threatened in their conditions of existence. These also
supply the proletariat with fresh elements of enlightenment and
progress.

Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour, the
process of dissolution going on within the ruling class, in fact within
the whole range of society, assumes such a violent, glaring character,
that a small section of the ruling class cuts itself adrift, and joins
the revolutionary class, the class that holds the future in its hands.
Just as, therefore, at an earlier period, a section of the nobility
went over to the bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes
over to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois
ideologists, who have raised themselves to the level of comprehending
theoretically the historical movement as a whole.

Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today,
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other
classes decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product. The lower middle
class, the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, the artisan, the
peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from
extinction their existence as fractions of the middle class. They are
therefore not revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, they are
reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. If by
chance they are revolutionary, they are so only in view of their
impending transfer into the proletariat, they thus defend not their
present, but their future interests, they desert their own standpoint
to place themselves at that of the proletariat.

The “dangerous class,” the social scum, that passively rotting mass
thrown off by the lowest layers of old society, may, here and there, be
swept into the movement by a proletarian revolution; its conditions of
life, however, prepare it far more for the part of a bribed tool of
reactionary intrigue.

In the conditions of the proletariat, those of old society at large are
already virtually swamped. The proletarian is without property; his
relation to his wife and children has no longer anything in common with
the bourgeois family-relations; modern industrial labour, modern
subjection to capital, the same in England as in France, in America as
in Germany, has stripped him of every trace of national character. Law,
morality, religion, are to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind
which lurk in ambush just as many bourgeois interests.

All the preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to fortify
their already acquired status by subjecting society at large to their
conditions of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become masters of
the productive forces of society, except by abolishing their own
previous mode of appropriation, and thereby also every other previous
mode of appropriation. They have nothing of their own to secure and to
fortify; their mission is to destroy all previous securities for, and
insurances of, individual property.

All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, or in
the interests of minorities. The proletarian movement is the
self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the
interests of the immense majority. The proletariat, the lowest stratum
of our present society, cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, without
the whole superincumbent strata of official society being sprung into
the air.

Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletariat
with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle. The proletariat
of each country must, of course, first of all settle matters with its
own bourgeoisie.

In depicting the most general phases of the development of the
proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging within
existing society, up to the point where that war breaks out into open
revolution, and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the
foundation for the sway of the proletariat.

Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have already
seen, on the antagonism of oppressing and oppressed classes. But in
order to oppress a class, certain conditions must be assured to it
under which it can, at least, continue its slavish existence. The serf,
in the period of serfdom, raised himself to membership in the commune,
just as the petty bourgeois, under the yoke of feudal absolutism,
managed to develop into a bourgeois. The modern laborer, on the
contrary, instead of rising with the progress of industry, sinks deeper
and deeper below the conditions of existence of his own class. He
becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops more rapidly than population
and wealth. And here it becomes evident, that the bourgeoisie is unfit
any longer to be the ruling class in society, and to impose its
conditions of existence upon society as an over-riding law. It is unfit
to rule because it is incompetent to assure an existence to its slave
within his slavery, because it cannot help letting him sink into such a
state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him. Society
can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, in other words, its
existence is no longer compatible with society.

The essential condition for the existence, and for the sway of the
bourgeois class, is the formation and augmentation of capital; the
condition for capital is wage-labour. Wage-labour rests exclusively on
competition between the laborers. The advance of industry, whose
involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the
labourers, due to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due
to association. The development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts
from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie
produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore,
produces, above all, is its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory
of the proletariat are equally inevitable.

PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS


In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a
whole?

The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other
working-class parties.

They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat
as a whole.

They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which to
shape and mould the proletarian movement.

The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties
by this only: (1) In the national struggles of the proletarians of the
different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common
interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality.
(2) In the various stages of development which the struggle of the
working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always
and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most
advanced and resolute section of the working-class parties of every
country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other
hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat
the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the
conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian
movement.

The immediate aim of the Communist is the same as that of all the other
proletarian parties: formation of the proletariat into a class,
overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power by
the proletariat.

The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based on
ideas or principles that have been invented, or discovered, by this or
that would-be universal reformer. They merely express, in general
terms, actual relations springing from an existing class struggle, from
a historical movement going on under our very eyes. The abolition of
existing property relations is not at all a distinctive feature of
Communism.

All property relations in the past have continually been subject to
historical change consequent upon the change in historical conditions.

The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in favour
of bourgeois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of
property generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But modern
bourgeois private property is the final and most complete expression of
the system of producing and appropriating products, that is based on
class antagonisms, on the exploitation of the many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in the
single sentence: Abolition of private property.

We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishing the
right of personally acquiring property as the fruit of a man’s own
labour, which property is alleged to be the groundwork of all personal
freedom, activity and independence.

Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property! Do you mean the property
of the petty artisan and of the small peasant, a form of property that
preceded the bourgeois form? There is no need to abolish that; the
development of industry has to a great extent already destroyed it, and
is still destroying it daily.

Or do you mean modern bourgeois private property?

But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer? Not a bit.
It creates capital, i.e., that kind of property which exploits
wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon condition of
begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploitation. Property,
in its present form, is based on the antagonism of capital and
wage-labour. Let us examine both sides of this antagonism.

To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a social
_status_ in production. Capital is a collective product, and only by
the united action of many members, nay, in the last resort, only by the
united action of all members of society, can it be set in motion.

Capital is, therefore, not a personal, it is a social power.

When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into the
property of all members of society, personal property is not thereby
transformed into social property. It is only the social character of
the property that is changed. It loses its class-character.

Let us now take wage-labour.

The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, _i.e_., that
quantum of the means of subsistence, which is absolutely requisite in
bare existence as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-labourer
appropriates by means of his labour, merely suffices to prolong and
reproduce a bare existence. We by no means intend to abolish this
personal appropriation of the products of labour, an appropriation that
is made for the maintenance and reproduction of human life, and that
leaves no surplus wherewith to command the labour of others. All that
we want to do away with, is the miserable character of this
appropriation, under which the labourer lives merely to increase
capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the
ruling class requires it.

In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase
accumulated labour. In Communist society, accumulated labour is but a
means to widen, to enrich, to promote the existence of the labourer.

In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in
Communist society, the present dominates the past. In bourgeois society
capital is independent and has individuality, while the living person
is dependent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things is called by the bourgeois,
abolition of individuality and freedom! And rightly so. The abolition
of bourgeois individuality, bourgeois independence, and bourgeois
freedom is undoubtedly aimed at.

By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of
production, free trade, free selling and buying.

But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying
disappears also. This talk about free selling and buying, and all the
other “brave words” of our bourgeoisie about freedom in general, have a
meaning, if any, only in contrast with restricted selling and buying,
with the fettered traders of the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when
opposed to the Communistic abolition of buying and selling, of the
bourgeois conditions of production, and of the bourgeoisie itself.

You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property.
But in your existing society, private property is already done away
with for nine-tenths of the population; its existence for the few is
solely due to its non-existence in the hands of those nine-tenths. You
reproach us, therefore, with intending to do away with a form of
property, the necessary condition for whose existence is the
non-existence of any property for the immense majority of society.

In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your
property. Precisely so; that is just what we intend.

From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into capital,
money, or rent, into a social power capable of being monopolised,
_i.e_., from the moment when individual property can no longer be
transformed into bourgeois property, into capital, from that moment,
you say individuality vanishes.

You must, therefore, confess that by “individual” you mean no other
person than the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of property.
This person must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and made impossible.

Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the products of
society; all that it does is to deprive him of the power to subjugate
the labour of others by means of such appropriation.

It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property all
work will cease, and universal laziness will overtake us.

According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone to the
dogs through sheer idleness; for those of its members who work, acquire
nothing, and those who acquire anything, do not work. The whole of this
objection is but another expression of the tautology: that there can no
longer be any wage-labour when there is no longer any capital.

All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing and
appropriating material products, have, in the same way, been urged
against the Communistic modes of producing and appropriating
intellectual products. Just as, to the bourgeois, the disappearance of
class property is the disappearance of production itself, so the
disappearance of class culture is to him identical with the
disappearance of all culture.

That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous
majority, a mere training to act as a machine.

But don’t wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended
abolition of bourgeois property, the standard of your bourgeois notions
of freedom, culture, law, etc. Your very ideas are but the outgrowth of
the conditions of your bourgeois production and bourgeois property,
just as your jurisprudence is but the will of your class made into a
law for all, a will, whose essential character and direction are
determined by the economical conditions of existence of your class.

The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into eternal
laws of nature and of reason, the social forms springing from your
present mode of production and form of property—historical relations
that rise and disappear in the progress of production—this
misconception you share with every ruling class that has preceded you.
What you see clearly in the case of ancient property, what you admit in
the case of feudal property, you are of course forbidden to admit in
the case of your own bourgeois form of property.

Abolition of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this
infamous proposal of the Communists.

On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family, based?
On capital, on private gain. In its completely developed form this
family exists only among the bourgeoisie. But this state of things
finds its complement in the practical absence of the family among the
proletarians, and in public prostitution.

The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its
complement vanishes, and both will vanish with the vanishing of
capital.

Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children by
their parents? To this crime we plead guilty.

But, you will say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations, when we
replace home education by social.

And your education! Is not that also social, and determined by the
social conditions under which you educate, by the intervention, direct
or indirect, of society, by means of schools, etc.? The Communists have
not invented the intervention of society in education; they do but seek
to alter the character of that intervention, and to rescue education
from the influence of the ruling class.

The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about the
hallowed co-relation of parent and child, becomes all the more
disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern Industry, all family ties
among the proletarians are torn asunder, and their children transformed
into simple articles of commerce and instruments of labour.

But you Communists would introduce community of women, screams the
whole bourgeoisie in chorus.

The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of production. He
hears that the instruments of production are to be exploited in common,
and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion than that the lot of
being common to all will likewise fall to the women.

He has not even a suspicion that the real point is to do away with the
status of women as mere instruments of production.

For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the virtuous indignation
of our bourgeois at the community of women which, they pretend, is to
be openly and officially established by the Communists. The Communists
have no need to introduce community of women; it has existed almost
from time immemorial.

Our bourgeois, not content with having the wives and daughters of their
proletarians at their disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes,
take the greatest pleasure in seducing each other’s wives.

Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system of wives in common and thus,
at the most, what the Communists might possibly be reproached with, is
that they desire to introduce, in substitution for a hypocritically
concealed, an openly legalised community of women. For the rest, it is
self-evident that the abolition of the present system of production
must bring with it the abolition of the community of women springing
from that system, _i.e_., of prostitution both public and private.

The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish
countries and nationality.

The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they
have not got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire political
supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of the nation, must
constitute itself _the_ nation, it is, so far, itself national, though
not in the bourgeois sense of the word.

National differences and antagonisms between peoples are daily more and
more vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom
of commerce, to the world-market, to uniformity in the mode of
production and in the conditions of life corresponding thereto.

The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still
faster. United action, of the leading civilised countries at least, is
one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.

In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another is put
an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also be put
an end to. In proportion as the antagonism between classes within the
nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another will come to an
end.

The charges against Communism made from a religious, a philosophical,
and, generally, from an ideological standpoint, are not deserving of
serious examination.

Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man’s ideas, views
and conceptions, in one word, man’s consciousness, changes with every
change in the conditions of his material existence, in his social
relations and in his social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual
production changes its character in proportion as material production
is changed? The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of
its ruling class.

When people speak of ideas that revolutionise society, they do but
express the fact, that within the old society, the elements of a new
one have been created, and that the dissolution of the old ideas keeps
even pace with the dissolution of the old conditions of existence.

When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions
were overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the
18th century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death
battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The ideas of religious
liberty and freedom of conscience merely gave expression to the sway of
free competition within the domain of knowledge.

“Undoubtedly,” it will be said, “religious, moral, philosophical and
juridical ideas have been modified in the course of historical
development. But religion, morality philosophy, political science, and
law, constantly survived this change.”

“There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc.
that are common to all states of society. But Communism abolishes
eternal truths, it abolishes all religion, and all morality, instead of
constituting them on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction to
all past historical experience.”

What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all past
society has consisted in the development of class antagonisms,
antagonisms that assumed different forms at different epochs.

But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all past
ages, viz., the exploitation of one part of society by the other. No
wonder, then, that the social consciousness of past ages, despite all
the multiplicity and variety it displays, moves within certain common
forms, or general ideas, which cannot completely vanish except with the
total disappearance of class antagonisms.

The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional
property relations; no wonder that its development involves the most
radical rupture with traditional ideas.

But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism.

We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the
working class, is to raise the proletariat to the position of ruling as
to win the battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degrees,
all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of
production in the hands of the State, _i.e_., of the proletariat
organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total of productive
forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means of
despotic inroads on the rights of property, and on the conditions of
bourgeois production; by means of measures, therefore, which appear
economically insufficient and untenable, but which, in the course of
the movement, outstrip themselves, necessitate further inroads upon the
old social order, and are unavoidable as a means of entirely
revolutionising the mode of production.

These measures will of course be different in different countries.

Nevertheless in the most advanced countries, the following will be
pretty generally applicable.

Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of land
to public purposes.

A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.

Abolition of all right of inheritance.

Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.

Centralisation of credit in the hands of the State, by means of a
national bank with State capital and an exclusive monopoly.

Centralisation of the means of communication and transport in the
hands of the State.

Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the
State; the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and the
improvement of the soil generally in accordance with a common plan.

Equal liability of all to labour. Establishment of industrial
armies, especially for agriculture.

Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual
abolition of the distinction between town and country, by a more
equable distribution of the population over the country.

Free education for all children in public schools.     Abolition of
children’s factory labour in its present form.     Combination of
education with industrial production, &c., &c.

When, in the course of development, class distinctions have
disappeared, and all production has been concentrated in the hands of a
vast association of the whole nation, the public power will lose its
political character. Political power, properly so called, is merely the
organised power of one class for oppressing another. If the proletariat
during its contest with the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of
circumstances, to organise itself as a class, if, by means of a
revolution, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away
by force the old conditions of production, then it will, along with
these conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of
class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will thereby have
abolished its own supremacy as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class
antagonisms, we shall have an association, in which the free
development of each is the condition for the free development of all.





SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE

REACTIONARY SOCIALISM

Feudal Socialism_


Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the
aristocracies of France and England to write pamphlets against modern
bourgeois society. In the French revolution of July 1830, and in the
English reform agitation, these aristocracies again succumbed to the
hateful upstart. Thenceforth, a serious political contest was
altogether out of the question. A literary battle alone remained
possible. But even in the domain of literature the old cries of the
restoration period had become impossible.

In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy were obliged to lose
sight, apparently, of their own interests, and to formulate their
indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the exploited
working class alone. Thus the aristocracy took their revenge by singing
lampoons on their new master, and whispering in his ears sinister
prophecies of coming catastrophe.

In this way arose Feudal Socialism: half lamentation, half lampoon;
half echo of the past, half menace of the future; at times, by its
bitter, witty and incisive criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to the
very heart’s core; but always ludicrous in its effect, through total
incapacity to comprehend the march of modern history.

The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved the
proletarian alms-bag in front for a banner. But the people, so often as
it joined them, saw on their hindquarters the old feudal coats of arms,
and deserted with loud and irreverent laughter.

One section of the French Legitimists and “Young England” exhibited
this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to that
of the bourgeoisie, the feudalists forget that they exploited under
circumstances and conditions that were quite different, and that are
now antiquated. In showing that, under their rule, the modern
proletariat never existed, they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is
the necessary offspring of their own form of society.

For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary character of
their criticism that their chief accusation against the bourgeoisie
amounts to this, that under the bourgeois _regime_ a class is being
developed, which is destined to cut up root and branch the old order of
society.

What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it creates a
proletariat, as that it creates a _revolutionary_ proletariat.

In political practice, therefore, they join in all coercive measures
against the working class; and in ordinary life, despite their high
falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the golden apples dropped from
the tree of industry, and to barter truth, love, and honour for traffic
in wool, beetroot-sugar, and potato spirits.

As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord, so has
Clerical Socialism with Feudal Socialism.

Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist tinge.
Has not Christianity declaimed against private property, against
marriage, against the State? Has it not preached in the place of these,
charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic
life and Mother Church? Christian Socialism is but the holy water with
which the priest consecrates the heart-burnings of the aristocrat.

Petty-Bourgeois Socialism_


The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by the
bourgeoisie, not the only class whose conditions of existence pined and
perished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois society. The mediaeval
burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were the precursors of the
modern bourgeoisie. In those countries which are but little developed,
industrially and commercially, these two classes still vegetate side by
side with the rising bourgeoisie.

In countries where modern civilisation has become fully developed, a
new class of petty bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating between
proletariat and bourgeoisie and ever renewing itself as a supplementary
part of bourgeois society. The individual members of this class,
however, are being constantly hurled down into the proletariat by the
action of competition, and, as modern industry develops, they even see
the moment approaching when they will completely disappear as an
independent section of modern society, to be replaced, in manufactures,
agriculture and commerce, by overlookers, bailiffs and shopmen.

In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more than
half of the population, it was natural that writers who sided with the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie, should use, in their criticism of
the bourgeois _regime_, the standard of the peasant and petty
bourgeois, and from the standpoint of these intermediate classes should
take up the cudgels for the working class. Thus arose petty-bourgeois
Socialism. Sismondi was the head of this school, not only in France but
also in England.

This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the
contradictions in the conditions of modern production. It laid bare the
hypocritical apologies of economists. It proved, incontrovertibly, the
disastrous effects of machinery and division of labour; the
concentration of capital and land in a few hands; overproduction and
crises; it pointed out the inevitable ruin of the petty bourgeois and
peasant, the misery of the proletariat, the anarchy in production, the
crying inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial war
of extermination between nations, the dissolution of old moral bonds,
of the old family relations, of the old nationalities.

In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism aspires either to
restoring the old means of production and of exchange, and with them
the old property relations, and the old society, or to cramping the
modern means of production and of exchange, within the framework of the
old property relations that have been, and were bound to be, exploded
by those means. In either case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.

Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture, patriarchal
relations in agriculture.

Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all
intoxicating effects of self-deception, this form of Socialism ended in
a miserable fit of the blues.

German, or “True,” Socialism_


The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a literature that
originated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and that was
the expression of the struggle against this power, was introduced into
Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that country, had just begun
its contest with feudal absolutism.

German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and _beaux esprits_,
eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting, that when these
writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social conditions
had not immigrated along with them. In contact with German social
conditions, this French literature lost all its immediate practical
significance, and assumed a purely literary aspect. Thus, to the German
philosophers of the eighteenth century, the demands of the first French
Revolution were nothing more than the demands of “Practical Reason” in
general, and the utterance of the will of the revolutionary French
bourgeoisie signified in their eyes the law of pure Will, of Will as it
was bound to be, of true human Will generally.

The world of the German _literati_ consisted solely in bringing the new
French ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical conscience,
or rather, in annexing the French ideas without deserting their own
philosophic point of view.

This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign language
is appropriated, namely, by translation.

It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic Saints
_over_ the manuscripts on which the classical works of ancient
heathendom had been written. The German _literati_ reversed this
process with the profane French literature. They wrote their
philosophical nonsense beneath the French original. For instance,
beneath the French criticism of the economic functions of money, they
wrote “Alienation of Humanity,” and beneath the French criticism of the
bourgeois State they wrote “dethronement of the Category of the
General,” and so forth.

The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of the
French historical criticisms they dubbed “Philosophy of Action,” “True
Socialism,” “German Science of Socialism,” “Philosophical Foundation of
Socialism,” and so on.

The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus completely
emasculated. And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to express
the struggle of one class with the other, he felt conscious of having
overcome “French one-sidedness” and of representing, not true
requirements, but the requirements of truth; not the interests of the
proletariat, but the interests of Human Nature, of Man in general, who
belongs to no class, has no reality, who exists only in the misty realm
of philosophical fantasy.

This German Socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously and
solemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such mountebank
fashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic innocence.

The fight of the German, and especially, of the Prussian bourgeoisie,
against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in other words, the
liberal movement, became more earnest.

By this, the long wished-for opportunity was offered to “True”
Socialism of confronting the political movement with the Socialist
demands, of hurling the traditional anathemas against liberalism,
against representative government, against bourgeois competition,
bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois
liberty and equality, and of preaching to the masses that they had
nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by this bourgeois movement.
German Socialism forgot, in the nick of time, that the French
criticism, whose silly echo it was, presupposed the existence of modern
bourgeois society, with its corresponding economic conditions of
existence, and the political constitution adapted thereto, the very
things whose attainment was the object of the pending struggle in
Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons,
professors, country squires and officials, it served as a welcome
scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie.

It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets
with which these same governments, just at that time, dosed the German
working-class risings.

While this “True” Socialism thus served the governments as a weapon for
fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time, directly
represented a reactionary interest, the interest of the German
Philistines. In Germany the _petty bourgeois_ class, a _relique_ of the
sixteenth century, and since then constantly cropping up again under
various forms, is the real social basis of the existing state of
things.

To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of things in
Germany. The industrial and political supremacy of the bourgeoisie
threatens it with certain destruction; on the one hand, from the
concentration of capital; on the other, from the rise of a
revolutionary proletariat. “True” Socialism appeared to kill these two
birds with one stone. It spread like an epidemic.

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of rhetoric,
steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental robe in
which the German Socialists wrapped their sorry “eternal truths,” all
skin and bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale of their goods
amongst such a public. And on its part, German Socialism recognised,
more and more, its own calling as the bombastic representative of the
petty-bourgeois Philistine.

It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the German
petty Philistine to be the typical man. To every villainous meanness of
this model man it gave a hidden, higher, Socialistic interpretation,
the exact contrary of its real character. It went to the extreme length
of directly opposing the “brutally destructive” tendency of Communism,
and of proclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of all class
struggles. With very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist and
Communist publications that now (1847) circulate in Germany belong to
the domain of this foul and enervating literature.

CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social grievances,
in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians,
improvers of the condition of the working class, organisers of charity,
members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals,
temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every imaginable
kind. This form of Socialism has, moreover, been worked out into
complete systems.

We may cite Proudhon’s _Philosophie de la Misère_ as an example of this
form.

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social
conditions without the struggles and dangers necessarily resulting
therefrom. They desire the existing state of society minus its
revolutionary and disintegrating elements. They wish for a bourgeoisie
without a proletariat. The bourgeoisie naturally conceives the world in
which it is supreme to be the best; and bourgeois Socialism develops
this comfortable conception into various more or less complete systems.
In requiring the proletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby to
march straightway into the social New Jerusalem, it but requires in
reality, that the proletariat should remain within the bounds of
existing society, but should cast away all its hateful ideas concerning
the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but less systematic, form of this
Socialism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in the eyes
of the working class, by showing that no mere political reform, but
only a change in the material conditions of existence, in economic
relations, could be of any advantage to them. By changes in the
material conditions of existence, this form of Socialism, however, by
no means understands abolition of the bourgeois relations of
production, an abolition that can be effected only by a revolution, but
administrative reforms, based on the continued existence of these
relations; reforms, therefore, that in no respect affect the relations
between capital and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost, and
simplify the administrative work, of bourgeois government.

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression, when, and only when,
it becomes a mere figure of speech.

Free trade: for the benefit of the working class. Protective duties:
for the benefit of the working class. Prison Reform: for the benefit of
the working class. This is the last word and the only seriously meant
word of bourgeois Socialism.

It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois—for the
benefit of the working class.

CRITICAL-UTOPIAN SOCIALISM AND COMMUNISM

We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great modern
revolution, has always given voice to the demands of the proletariat,
such as the writings of Babeuf and others.

The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own ends,
made in times of universal excitement, when feudal society was being
overthrown, these attempts necessarily failed, owing to the then
undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to the absence of the
economic conditions for its emancipation, conditions that had yet to be
produced, and could be produced by the impending bourgeois epoch alone.
The revolutionary literature that accompanied these first movements of
the proletariat had necessarily a reactionary character. It inculcated
universal asceticism and social levelling in its crudest form.

The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called, those of
Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen and others, spring into existence in the
early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle between
proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section 1. Bourgeois and
Proletarians).

The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as
well as the action of the decomposing elements, in the prevailing form
of society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them
the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any
independent political movement.

Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with the
development of industry, the economic situation, as they find it, does
not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the emancipation
of the proletariat. They therefore search after a new social science,
after new social laws, that are to create these conditions.

Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive action,
historically created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones, and
the gradual, spontaneous class-organisation of the proletariat to the
organisation of society specially contrived by these inventors. Future
history resolves itself, in their eyes, into the propaganda and the
practical carrying out of their social plans.

In the formation of their plans they are conscious of caring chiefly
for the interests of the working class, as being the most suffering
class. Only from the point of view of being the most suffering class
does the proletariat exist for them.

The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own
surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far
superior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve the condition
of every member of society, even that of the most favoured. Hence, they
habitually appeal to society at large, without distinction of class;
nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For how can people, when once
they understand their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan
of the best possible state of society?

Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary,
action; they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means, and
endeavour, by small experiments, necessarily doomed to failure, and by
the force of example, to pave the way for the new social Gospel.

Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time when the
proletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has but a
fantastic conception of its own position correspond with the first
instinctive yearnings of that class for a general reconstruction of
society.

But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a critical
element. They attack every principle of existing society. Hence they
are full of the most valuable materials for the enlightenment of the
working class. The practical measures proposed in them—such as the
abolition of the distinction between town and country, of the family,
of the carrying on of industries for the account of private
individuals, and of the wage system, the proclamation of social
harmony, the conversion of the functions of the State into a mere
superintendence of production, all these proposals, point solely to the
disappearance of class antagonisms which were, at that time, only just
cropping up, and which, in these publications, are recognised in their
earliest, indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals,
therefore, are of a purely Utopian character.

The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism bears an
inverse relation to historical development. In proportion as the modern
class struggle develops and takes definite shape, this fantastic
standing apart from the contest, these fantastic attacks on it, lose
all practical value and all theoretical justification. Therefore,
although the originators of these systems were, in many respects,
revolutionary, their disciples have, in every case, formed mere
reactionary sects. They hold fast by the original views of their
masters, in opposition to the progressive historical development of the
proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently, to
deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms. They
still dream of experimental realisation of their social Utopias, of
founding isolated “phalansteres,” of establishing “Home Colonies,” of
setting up a “Little Icaria”—duodecimo editions of the New
Jerusalem—and to realise all these castles in the air, they are
compelled to appeal to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By
degrees they sink into the category of the reactionary conservative
Socialists depicted above, differing from these only by more systematic
pedantry, and by their fanatical and superstitious belief in the
miraculous effects of their social science.

They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of
the working class; such action, according to them, can only result from
blind unbelief in the new Gospel.

The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively,
oppose the Chartists and the “Réformistes.”


POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RELATION TO THE VARIOUS EXISTING
OPPOSITION PARTIES


Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the
existing working-class parties, such as the Chartists in England and
the Agrarian Reformers in America.

The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the
enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the
movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the
future of that movement. In France the Communists ally themselves with
the Social-Democrats, against the conservative and radical bourgeoisie,
reserving, however, the right to take up a critical position in regard
to phrases and illusions traditionally handed down from the great
Revolution.

In Switzerland they support the Radicals, without losing sight of the
fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of
Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of radical
bourgeois.

In Poland they support the party that insists on an agrarian revolution
as the prime condition for national emancipation, that party which
fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.

In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a
revolutionary way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal
squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.

But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the working
class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism
between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the German workers
may straightaway use, as so many weapons against the bourgeoisie, the
social and political conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily
introduce along with its supremacy, and in order that, after the fall
of the reactionary classes in Germany, the fight against the
bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin.

The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because that
country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to be
carried out under more advanced conditions of European civilisation,
and with a much more developed proletariat, than that of England was in
the seventeenth, and of France in the eighteenth century, and because
the bourgeois revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an
immediately following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary
movement against the existing social and political order of things.

In all these movements they bring to the front, as the leading question
in each, the property question, no matter what its degree of
development at the time.

Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the
democratic parties of all countries.

The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly
declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow
of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a
Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their
chains. They have a world to win.

WORKING MEN OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE!


-------------------------------------
---------------------------------------

I consider the system of bourgeois economy in the following order:
_Capital_, _landed property_, _wage labor_; _state_, _foreign trade_,
_world market_. Under the first three heads I examine the conditions
of the economic existence of the three great classes, which make up
modern bourgeois society; the connection of the three remaining heads
is self evident. The first part of the first book, treating of capital,
consists of the following chapters: 1. Commodity; 2. Money, or simple
circulation; 3. Capital in general. The first two chapters form the
contents of the present work. The entire material lies before me in the
form of monographs, written at long intervals not for publication, but
for the purpose of clearing up those questions to myself, and their
systematic elaboration on the plan outlined above will depend upon
circumstances.

I omit a general introduction which I had prepared, as on second
thought any anticipation of results that are still to be proven, seemed
to me objectionable, and the reader who wishes to follow me at all,
must make up his mind to pass from the special to the general. On the
other hand, some remarks as to the course of my own politico-economic
studies may be in place here.

The subject of my professional studies was jurisprudence, which I
pursued, however, in connection with and as secondary to the studies
of philosophy and history. In 1842-43, as editor of the “Rheinische
Zeitung,” I found myself embarrassed at first when I had to take part
in discussions concerning so-called material interests. The proceedings
of the Rhine Diet in connection with forest thefts and the extreme
subdivision of landed property; the official controversy about the
condition of the Mosel peasants into which Herr von Schaper, at that
time president of the Rhine Province, entered with the “Rheinische
Zeitung;” finally, the debates on free trade and protection, gave
me the first impulse to take up the study of economic questions. At
the same time a weak, quasi-philosophic echo of French socialism and
communism made itself heard in the “Rheinische Zeitung” in those days
when the good intentions “to go ahead” greatly outweighed knowledge of
facts. I declared myself against such botching, but had to admit at
once in a controversy with the “Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung” that my
previous studies did not allow me to hazard an independent judgment as
to the merits of the French schools. When, therefore, the publishers
of the “Rheinische Zeitung” conceived the illusion that by a less
aggressive policy the paper could be saved from the death sentence
pronounced upon it, I was glad to grasp that opportunity to retire to
my study room from public life.

The first work undertaken for the solution of the question that
troubled me, was a critical revision of Hegel’s “Philosophy of Law”;
the introduction to that work appeared in the “Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher,” published in Paris in 1844. I was led by my studies to
the conclusion that legal relations as well as forms of state could
neither be understood by themselves, nor explained by the so-called
general progress of the human mind, but that they are rooted in the
material conditions of life, which are summed up by Hegel after the
fashion of the English and French of the eighteenth century under
the name “civic society;” the anatomy of that civic society is to
be sought in political economy. The study of the latter which I had
taken up in Paris, I continued at Brussels whither I emigrated on
account of an order of expulsion issued by Mr. Guizot. The general
conclusion at which I arrived and which, once reached, continued to
serve as the leading thread in my studies, may be briefly summed up as
follows: In the social production which men carry on they enter into
definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their
will; these relations of production correspond to a definite stage
of development of their material powers of production. The sum total
of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure
of society―the real foundation, on which rise legal and political
superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness. The mode of production in material life determines the
general character of the social, political and spiritual processes
of life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines
their consciousness. At a certain stage of their development, the
material forces of production in society come in conflict with the
existing relations of production, or―what is but a legal expression
for the same thing―with the property relations within which they
had been at work before. From forms of development of the forces
of production these relations turn into their fetters. Then comes
the period of social revolution. With the change of the economic
foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly
transformed. In considering such transformations the distinction should
always be made between the material transformation of the economic
conditions of production which can be determined with the precision
of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or
philosophic―in short ideological forms in which men become conscious of
this conflict and fight it out. Just as our opinion of an individual
is not based on what he thinks of himself, so can we not judge of such
a period of transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary,
this consciousness must rather be explained from the contradictions of
material life, from the existing conflict between the social forces
of production and the relations of production. No social order ever
disappears before all the productive forces, for which there is room
in it, have been developed; and new higher relations of production
never appear before the material conditions of their existence have
matured in the womb of the old society. Therefore, mankind always
takes up only such problems as it can solve; since, looking at the
matter more closely, we will always find that the problem itself
arises only when the material conditions necessary for its solution
already exist or are at least in the process of formation. In broad
outlines we can designate the Asiatic, the ancient, the feudal, and
the modern bourgeois methods of production as so many epochs in the
progress of the economic formation of society. The bourgeois relations
of production are the last antagonistic form of the social process of
production―antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonism, but
of one arising from conditions surrounding the life of individuals in
society; at the same time the productive forces developing in the womb
of bourgeois society create the material conditions for the solution
of that antagonism. This social formation constitutes, therefore, the
closing chapter of the prehistoric stage of human society.

Frederick Engels, with whom I was continually corresponding and
exchanging ideas since the appearance of his ingenious critical essay
on economic categories (in the “Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher”),
came by a different road to the same conclusions as myself (see his
“Condition of the Working Classes in England”). When he, too, settled
in Brussels in the spring of 1845, we decided to work out together the
contrast between our view and the idealism of the German philosophy, in
fact to settle our accounts with our former philosophic conscience. The
plan was carried out in the form of a criticism of the post-Hegelian
philosophy. The manuscript in two solid octavo volumes had long
reached the publisher in Westphalia, when we received information
that conditions had so changed as not to allow of its publication. We
abandoned the manuscript to the stinging criticism of the mice the
more readily since we had accomplished our main purpose―the clearing
up of the question to ourselves. Of the scattered writings on various
subjects in which we presented our views to the public at that time, I
recall only the “Manifesto of the Communist Party” written by Engels
and myself, and the “Discourse on Free Trade” written by myself. The
leading points of our theory were first presented scientifically,
though in a polemic form, in my “Misère de la Philosophie, etc.”
directed against Proudhon and published in 1847. An essay on “Wage
Labor,” written by me in German, and in which I put together my
lectures on the subject delivered before the German Workmen’s Club at
Brussels, was prevented from leaving the hands of the printer by the
February revolution and my expulsion from Belgium which followed it as
a consequence.

The publication of the “Neue Rheinische Zeitung” in 1848 and 1849, and
the events which took place later on, interrupted my economic studies
which I could not resume before 1850 in London. The enormous material
on the history of political economy which is accumulated in the British
Museum; the favorable view which London offers for the observation of
bourgeois society; finally, the new stage of development upon which the
latter seemed to have entered with the discovery of gold in California
and Australia, led me to the decision to resume my studies from the
very beginning and work up critically the new material. These studies
partly led to what might seem side questions, over which I nevertheless
had to stop for longer or shorter periods of time. Especially was the
time at my disposal cut down by the imperative necessity of working
for a living. My work as contributor on the leading Anglo-American
newspaper, the “New York Tribune,” at which I have now been engaged for
eight years, has caused very great interruption in my studies, since
I engage in newspaper work proper only occasionally. Yet articles on
important economic events in England and on the continent have formed
so large a part of my contributions that I have been obliged to make
myself familiar with practical details which lie outside the proper
sphere of political economy.

This account of the course of my studies in political economy is simply
to prove that my views, whatever one may think of them, and no matter
how little they agree with the interested prejudices of the ruling
classes, are the result of many years of conscientious research. At the
entrance to science, however, the same requirement must be put as at
the entrance to hell:

  Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto
  Ogni viltà convien che qui sia morta.


  Karl Marx.








At first sight the wealth of society under the capitalist system
presents itself as an immense accumulation of commodities, its unit
being a single commodity. But every commodity has a twofold aspect,
that of _use value_ and _exchange value_.[2]

A commodity is first of all, in the language of English economists,
“any thing necessary, useful or pleasant in life,” an object of human
wants, a means of existence in the broadest sense of the word. This
property of commodities to serve as use-values coincides with their
natural palpable existence. Wheat e. g. is a distinct use-value
differing from the use-values cotton, glass, paper, etc. Use-value has
a value only in use and is realized only in the process of consumption.
The same use-value may be utilized in various ways. But the extent of
its possible applications is circumscribed by its distinct properties.
Furthermore, it is thus limited not only qualitatively but also
quantitatively. According to their natural properties the various
use-values have different measures, such as a bushel of wheat, a quire
of paper, a yard of linen, etc.

Whatever the social form of wealth may be, use-values always have a
substance of their own, independent of that form. One can not tell by
the taste of wheat whether it has been raised by a Russian serf, a
French peasant, or an English capitalist. Although the object of social
wants and, therefore, mutually connected in society, use-values do
not bear any marks of the relations of social production. Suppose, we
have a commodity whose use-value is that of a diamond. We can not tell
by looking at the diamond that it is a commodity. When it serves as a
use-value, aesthetic or mechanical, on the breast of a harlot, or in
the hand of a glasscutter, it is a diamond and not a commodity. It is
the necessary prerequisite of a commodity to be a use-value, but it is
immaterial to the use-value whether it is a commodity or not. Use-value
in this indifference to the nature of its economic destination, i. e.
use-value as such lies outside the sphere of investigation of political
economy.[3] It falls within the sphere of the latter only in so far
as it forms its own economic destination. It forms the material basis
which directly underlies a definite economic relation called _exchange
value_.

Exchange-value appears at first sight as a _quantitative relation_,
as a proportion in which use-values are exchanged for one another. In
such a relation they constitute equal exchangeable quantities. Thus,
a volume of Propercius and eight ounces of snuff may represent the
same exchange value, in spite of the dissimilar use-values of tobacco
and elegy. As exchange-value, one kind of use-value is worth as much
as another kind, if only taken in right proportion. The exchange
value of a palace can be expressed in a certain number of boxes of
shoe-blacking. On the contrary, London manufacturers of shoe-blacking
have expressed the exchange value of their many boxes of blacking,
in palaces. Thus, entirely apart from their natural forms and
without regard to the specific kind of wants for which they serve as
use-values, commodities in certain quantities equal each other, take
each other’s place in exchange, pass as equivalents, and in spite of
their variegated appearance, represent the same entity.

Use-values are primarily means of existence. These means of existence,
however, are themselves products of social life, the result of expended
human vital power, _materialized labor_. As the embodiment of social
labor, all commodities are the crystallization of the same substance.
Let us now consider the nature of this substance, i. e., of labor,
which is expressed in exchange value.

Let one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat and
twenty yards of silk represent equal exchange values. As equivalents,
in which the qualitative difference between their use-values has been
eliminated, they represent equal volumes of the same kind of labor.
The labor which is equally embodied in all of them must be uniform,
homogeneous, simple labor. It matters as little in the case of labor
whether it be embodied in gold, iron, wheat, or silk, as it does in
the case of oxygen, whether it appears in the rust of iron, in the
atmosphere, in the juice of a grape, or in the blood of a human being.
But the digging of gold, the extraction of iron from a mine, the
raising of wheat and the weaving of silk are so many kinds of labor,
differing in quality. As a matter of fact, what in reality appears as a
difference in use-values, is in the process of production, a difference
in the work creating those use-values. Just as labor, which creates
exchange value, is indifferent to the material of use-values, so it
is to the special form of labor itself. Furthermore, the different
use-values are the products of the work of different individuals,
consequently the result of various kinds of labor differing
individually from one another. But as exchange values, they represent
the same homogeneous labor, i. e., labor from which the individuality
of the workers is eliminated. Labor creating exchange value is,
therefore, _abstract general labor_.

If one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat, and twenty
yards of silk are exchange values of equal magnitude or equivalents;
then one ounce of gold, half a ton of iron, three bushels of wheat
and five yards of silk are exchange values of different magnitudes,
and this quantitative difference is the only difference of which
they are capable as exchange values. As exchange values of different
magnitudes, they represent greater or smaller quantities of that
simple, homogeneous, abstract, general labor, which forms the substance
of exchange value. The question arises, how are these quantities to be
measured? Or, rather what constitutes the substance of labor, which
makes it capable of quantitative measurement, since the quantitative
differences of commodities in their capacity of exchange values are
but quantitative differences of labor embodied in them. Just as motion
is measured by time, so is labor measured by _labor-time_. Given
the quality of labor, the difference in its duration is the only
property by which it can be distinguished. As labor-time, labor has
the same standard of measurement as the natural time measures, viz.,
hours, days, weeks, etc. Labor-time is the vital substance of labor,
independent of its form, composition, individuality; it is its vital
substance quantitatively, having at the same time its own inherent
measure. Labor-time embodied in the use-values of commodities is the
substance which makes exchange values and, therefore, commodities of
them and at the same time serves to measure definite quantities of
their value. Corresponding quantities of different use-values, in which
the same quantity of labor-time is embodied, are equivalents; or, to
put it in another form, all use-values are equivalents when taken in
proportions containing the same quantity of expended, materialized
labor-time. As exchange values, all commodities are but definite
measures of _congealed labor-time_.

To understand how exchange value is determined by labor-time, the
following main points must be kept in mind: The reduction of labor to
simple labor, devoid of any quality, so to speak; the specific ways
and means by which exchange―value-creating, i. e., commodity producing
labor becomes _social labor_; finally, the difference between labor as
the producer of use-values, and labor as the creator of exchange values.

In order to measure commodities by the labor-time contained in them,
the different kinds of labor must be reduced to uniform, homogeneous,
simple labor, in short, to labor which is qualitatively the same, and,
therefore, differs only in quantity.

This reduction appears to be an abstraction; but it is an abstraction
which takes place daily in the social process of production. The
conversion of all commodities into labor-time is no greater abstraction
nor a less real process than the chemical reduction of all organic
bodies to air. Labor, thus measured by time, does not appear in reality
as the labor of different individuals. but on the contrary, the
various working individuals rather appear as mere organs of labor; or,
in so far as labor is represented by exchange values, it may be defined
as human labor in general. This abstraction of human labor in general
virtually exists in the average labor which the average individual
of a given society can perform―a certain productive expenditure of
human muscles, nerves, brain, etc. It is unskilled labor to which the
average individual can be put and which he has to perform in one way
or another. The character of this average labor varies in different
countries and at different stages of civilization, but appears fixed in
a particular society. Unskilled labor constitutes the bulk of all labor
performed in capitalist society, as may be seen from all statistics.

It is obvious that if A spends six hours in the production of iron
and six hours on linen, and B also produces iron during six hours and
linen during another six hours, it is but a different application
of _the same_ labor time that would be expended, if A produced iron
during twelve hours, while B worked twelve hours on linen. But how
about skilled labor which rises above the level of average labor by its
higher intensity, by its greater specific gravity? This kind of labor
resolves itself into unskilled labor composing it; it is simple labor
of a higher intensity, so that one day of skilled labor, e. g., may
equal three days of unskilled labor. This is not the place to consider
the laws regulating this reduction. It is clear, however, that such
reduction does take place, for, as exchange value, the product of the
most skilled labor is, when taken in a certain proportion, equivalent
to the product of unskilled average labor, or equal to a definite
quantity of that unskilled labor.

The determination of exchange-value by means of labor-time implies,
further, the fact that an equal quantity of labor is embodied in any
given commodity, e. g., a ton of iron, no matter whether it is the work
of A or B, that is to say, various individuals expend an equal amount
of labor-time for the production of the same use-value of a given
quality and quantity. It is thus assumed that the labor-time contained
in a commodity is the labor-time _necessary_ for its production, i. e.,
it is the labor-time which is required for the production of another
specimen of the same commodity under the same general conditions of
production.

The conditions of labor, which creates exchange value, as shown by the
analysis of the latter, are _social conditions_ of labor or conditions
of _social labor_. Social, not in the ordinary, but in a special
sense. It is a specific form of the social process. The homogeneous
simplicity of labor means first of all _equality_ of the labors of
various individuals, a reciprocal relation of equality of their labors
determined by the actual reduction of all kinds of labor to uniform
labor. The labor of every individual, as far as it is expressed in
exchange value possesses this social character of equality and finds
expression in exchange value only in so far as it is a relation of
equality with the labor of all other individuals.

Furthermore, the labor-time of a single individual is directly
expressed in exchange value as _universal labor-time_, and this
_universal character_ of individual labor is the manifestation of its
_social character_. The labor-time represented by exchange value is the
labor-time of an individual, but of an individual undistinguished from
other individuals in so far as they perform the same labor; therefore,
the time required by one individual for the production of a certain
commodity is the _necessary_ labor-time which any other individual
would have to spend on the production of the same commodity. It is the
labor-time of an individual, _his_ labor-time, but only as labor-time
common to all, regardless as to which particular individual’s
labor-time it is. As universal labor-time it is represented in a
universal product, in a _universal equivalent_, in a definite quantity
of materialized labor-time: the latter is indifferent as to the
particular form of use-value in which it appears directly as the
product of an individual, and may be turned at will into any other
form of use-value to represent the product of any other individual.
Only as such a _universal_ quantity, is it a _social_ quantity. In
order to result in exchange value, the labor of an individual must
be turned into a _universal equivalent_, i. e., the labor-time of an
individual must be expressed as universal labor-time, or universal
labor-time as that of an individual. It is the same as though different
individuals had put together their labor-time and contributed the
different quantities of labor-time at their common disposal in the form
of different use-values. The labor-time of the individual is thus,
in fact, the labor time which society requires for the production of
a certain use-value, i. e., for the satisfaction of a certain want.
But the question that interests us here is as to the specific form in
which labor acquires a social character. Let us suppose that a certain
quantity of labor-time of a spinner is realized in 100 lbs. of yarn.
Suppose 100 yards of linen, the product of the weaver, represent the
same quantity of labor-time. Inasmuch as these two products represent
equal quantities of universal labor-time and, hence, are equivalents of
_every_ use-value which contains the same amount of labor-time, they
are also equivalent to each other. Only because the labor-time of the
spinner and that of the weaver take the form of universal labor-time
and their products appear as universal equivalents, is the labor of
the weaver realized for the spinner, and that of the spinner, for the
weaver, the labor of one takes the place of the labor of the other, i.
e., the social character of their labors is realized for both. Quite
different it was under the patriarchal system of production, when
spinner and weaver lived under the same roof, when the female members
of the family did the spinning, and the male members did the weaving to
supply the wants of their own family; then yarn and linen were _social_
products, spinning and weaving were _social_ labor within the limits of
the family. But their social character did not manifest itself in the
fact that yarn, as a universal equivalent, could be exchanged for linen
as a universal equivalent, or that one was exchanged for another, as
identical and equivalent expressions of the same universal labor-time.
It was rather the family organization with its natural division of
labor that impressed its peculiar social stamp on the product of
labor. Or, let us take the services and payments in kind of the Middle
Ages. It was the specific kind of labor performed by each individual in
its natural form, the particular and not the universal aspect of labor,
that constituted then the social tie. Or, let us finally take labor
carried on in common in its primitive natural form, as we find it at
the dawn of history of all civilized races.[4] It is clear that in this
case labor does not acquire its social character from the fact that the
labor of the individual takes on the abstract form of universal labor
or that his product assumes the form of a universal equivalent. The
very nature of production under a communal system makes it impossible
for the labor of the individual to be private labor and his product
to be a private product; on the contrary, it makes individual labor
appear as the direct function of a member of a social organism. On the
contrary, labor, which is expressed in exchange value, at once appears
as the labor of a separate individual. It becomes social labor only
by taking on the form of its direct opposite, the form of abstract
universal labor.

Labor, which creates exchange value, is, finally, characterized by the
fact that even the social relations of men appear in the reversed form
of a social relation of things. Only in so far as two use-values are
in a mutual relation of exchange values does the labor of different
persons possess the common property of being identical universal labor.
Hence, if it be correct to say that exchange value is a relation
between persons,[5] it must be added that it is a relation disguised
under a material cover. Just as a pound of iron and a pound of gold
represent the _same_ weight in spite of their different physical and
chemical properties, so do two use-values, as commodities containing
the same quantity of labor-time, represent the _same exchange value_.
Exchange value thus appears as the natural social destination of
use-values, a property which they possess by virtue of being things and
in consequence of which they are exchanged for one another in definite
proportions, or form equivalents, just as chemical elements combine in
certain proportions, forming chemical equivalents. It is only through
the habit of everyday life that we come to think it perfectly plain and
commonplace, that a social relation of production should take on the
form of a thing, so that the relation of persons in their work appears
in the form of a mutual relation between things, and between things
and persons.

In commodities this mystification is as yet very simple. It is more
or less plain to everybody that a relation of commodities as exchange
values is nothing but a mutual relation between persons in their
productive activity. This semblance of simplicity disappears in higher
productive relations. All the illusions in regard to the monetary
system are due to the fact that money is not regarded as something
representing a social relation of production, but as a product of
nature endowed with certain properties. The modern economists who sneer
at the illusions of the monetary system, betray the same illusion
as soon as they have to deal with higher economic forms, as, e. g.,
capital.[6] It breaks forth in their confession of naive surprise, when
what they have just thought to have defined with great difficulty as a
thing suddenly appears as a social relation and then reappears to tease
them again as a thing, before they have barely managed to define it as
a social relation.

Since the exchange value of commodities is, in fact, nothing but a
mutual relation of the labors of individuals―labors which are similar
and universal―nothing but a material expression of a specific social
form of labor, it is a tautology to say that labor is the _only_
source of exchange value and consequently of wealth, in so far as the
latter consists of exchange values. Similarly, it is a tautology to
say that matter in its natural state has no exchange value, because
it does not contain any labor, and that exchange value as such does
not contain matter. But when William Petty calls “labor the father and
earth the mother of wealth,” or when Bishop Berkeley asks “whether
the four elements and man’s labour therein, be not the true source of
wealth,”[7] or when the American, Thomas Cooper puts it popularly:
“Take away from a piece of bread the labour bestowed by the baker on
the flour, by the miller on the grain brought to him, by the farmer
in ploughing, sowing, tending, gathering, threshing, cleaning and
transporting the seed, and what will remain? A few grains of grass,
growing wild in the woods, and unfit for any human purpose”[8]―then all
these views do not refer to abstract labor as the source of exchange
value, but to concrete labor as the source of material wealth; in
short, to labor in so far as it produces use-values. In assuming
that a commodity has use-value we assume the special usefulness
and distinct fitness of the labor absorbed by it, but that is all
there is to the view of labor as useful labor from the standpoint of
commodity. Considering bread as a use-value, we are interested in its
properties as an article of food and not at all in the different kinds
of labor of the farmer, miller, baker, etc. If by some invention
nineteen-twentieths of this labor could be saved, the loaf of bread
would still render the same service as before. If it fell ready-made
from the sky it would not lose a single atom of its use-value. While
labor which creates exchange value is realized in the equality of
commodities as universal equivalents, labor as a productive activity
with a useful purpose is realized in the endless variety of use-values
created by it. While labor which creates exchange values is _abstract_,
_universal_ and _homogeneous_, labor which produces use-values is
concrete and special and is made up of an endless variety of kinds of
labor according to the way in which and the material to which it is
applied.

It is wrong to speak of labor in so far as it is applied to the
production of use-values as of _the only_ source of wealth, namely,
the material wealth produced by it. Being an activity intended to
adapt materials to this or that purpose, it requires matter as a
prerequisite. In different use-values the proportion between labor
and raw material varies greatly, but use-value always has a natural
substratum. Labor, as an activity, directed to the adaptation of raw
material in one form or another, is a natural condition of human
existence, a condition of exchange of matter between man and nature,
independent of all social forms. On the contrary, labor producing
exchange value is a specifically social form of labor. Tailoring, e.
g., in its material manifestation as a distinct productive activity,
produces a coat, but not the exchange value of the coat. The latter
is produced not by the labor of the tailor as such, but by abstract
universal labor, and that belongs to a certain organization of society
which has not been brought about by the tailor. Thus, the women under
the ancient system of house industry made coats without producing the
exchange value of the coats. Labor as a source of material wealth was
known to Moses, the legislator, as well as to Adam Smith, the customs
official.[9]

Let us consider now some propositions which follow from the
determination of exchange value by labor-time.

As a use-value, every commodity owes its usefulness to itself. Wheat,
e. g., serves as an article of food. A machine saves labor to a certain
extent. This function of a commodity by virtue of which it serves only
as use-value, as an article of consumption, may be called its service,
the service which it renders as use-value. But as an exchange value,
a commodity is always regarded as a result; the question in this case
is not as to the service which it renders, but as to the service[10]
which it has been rendered in its production. Thus, the exchange value
of a machine is determined not by the quantity of labor-time which it
saves, but by the quantity of labor-time which has been expended on
its own production and which is, therefore, required to produce a new
machine of the same kind.

If, therefore, the quantity of labor-time required for the production
of commodities remained constant, their exchange value would remain
the same. But the ease and the difficulty of production are constantly
changing. If the productivity of labor increases, the same use-value
will be produced in less time. If the productivity of labor declines,
more time will be required for the production of the same use-value.
Thus, the labor-time contained in a commodity or its exchange-value is
a variable quantity, increasing or diminishing in an inverse ratio to
the rise and fall of the productivity of labor. The productive power of
labor which is applied in the manufacturing industry on a predetermined
scale depends in the agricultural and extractive industries also on
natural conditions which are beyond human control. _The same labor_
will yield a greater or less output of various metals, according to
their more or less close occurrence in the earth’s crust. _The same
labor_ may be embodied in two bushels of wheat in a favorable season,
and only in one in an unfavorable season. In this case, scarcity or
abundance, as natural conditions, seem to determine the exchange value
of commodities, because they determine the productivity of certain
kinds of labor which depend upon natural conditions.

Unequal volumes of different use-value contain the same quantity of
labor-time or the same exchange value. The smaller the volume of a
use-value containing a certain quantity of labor-time as compared with
other use-values, the greater its _specific exchange-value_. If we find
that certain use-values, such as, e. g., gold, silver, copper and iron,
or wheat, rye, barley and oats, form a series of specific exchange
values which, though not retaining exactly the same numerical ratio,
still retain through widely remote epochs of civilization the same
rough proportion of relatively larger and smaller quantities, we may
draw the conclusion that the progressive development of the productive
powers of society has equally, or approximately so, affected the
labor-time necessary for the production of the various commodities.

The exchange value of a commodity is not revealed in its own use-value.
But, as the embodiment universal social labor-time, the use-value
of one commodity bears a certain ratio to the use-values of other
commodities. Thus, the exchange value of one commodity is manifested
in the use-values of other commodities. An equivalent is, in fact, the
exchange value of one commodity expressed in the use-value of another
commodity. If I say, e. g., that one yard of linen is worth two pounds
of coffee, then the exchange value of linen is expressed in terms of
the use-value of coffee, viz., in a certain quantity of that use-value.
This ratio being given, I can express the value of any quantity of
linen in coffee. It is clear that the exchange value of one commodity,
say linen, is not confined to the ratio of any one commodity, e. g.
coffee, as its equivalent. The quantity of universal labor-time which
is represented in one yard of linen is at the same time embodied in
an endless variety of volumes of use-values of all other commodities.
The use-value of any other commodity forms the equivalent of one yard
of linen, in the proportion in which it represents the same quantity of
labor-time as that yard of linen. The exchange value of _this single
commodity_ is, therefore, fully expressed in the endless number of
equations in which the use-values of all other commodities form its
equivalents. Not until the exchange value of a commodity is expressed
in the sum total of these equations or of the different proportions in
which one commodity is exchanged for every other commodity, does it
find an exhaustive expression as a _universal equivalent_; e. g., the
series of equations:

  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea,
  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee,
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread,
  1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico,

may be represented as follows:

1 yard of linen = 1/8 lb. of tea + 1/2 lb. of coffee + 2 lbs. of bread
+ 1-1/2 yards of calico.

Therefore, if we had before us the sum total of the equations, in
which the value of a yard of linen is exhaustively expressed, we could
represent its exchange value in the form of a series. As a matter of
fact, the series is an endless one, since the circle of commodities,
constantly expanding, can never be closed up. But while the exchange
value of one commodity is thus measured by the use-values of all other
commodities, the exchange values of all the other commodities are, in
their turn, measured by the use-value of this one commodity.[11]

If the exchange value of one yard of linen is expressed in 1/2 lb. of
tea, or 2 lbs. of coffee, or 6 yards of calico, or 8 lbs. of bread,
etc., it follows that coffee, tea, calico, bread, etc., are equal to
each other if taken in the same proportion in which they are equal to
the third article, linen; consequently, linen serves as the common
measure of their exchange values. Every commodity, as the embodiment
of universal labor-time, i. e., as a certain quantity of universal
labor-time, expresses in turn its exchange value in definite quantities
of the use-values of all other commodities, and the exchange values
of all the other commodities are, on the other hand, measured by the
use-value of this one exclusive commodity. But as an exchange value,
every commodity is at the same time the one exclusive commodity
that serves as a common measure of the exchange values of all other
commodities; and, on the other hand, it is but one of the many
commodities in the entire series of which every commodity expresses
directly its exchange value.

The value of a commodity is not affected by the number of commodities
of other kinds. But the length of the series of equations in which
its exchange value is realized does depend upon the greater or less
variety of other commodities. The series of equations in which the
value of coffee, e. g., is represented, indicates the extent to which
it is exchangeable, the limits within which it performs the function of
an exchange value. The exchange value of a commodity as an embodiment
of universal social labor-time is expressed in its equivalence to an
endless variety of use-values.

We have seen that the exchange value of a commodity varies with the
quantity of labor-time directly contained in it. Its realized exchange
value, i. e., its exchange value expressed in the use-values of other
commodities, must also depend on the proportion in which the labor-time
spent on the production of all other commodities is changing. If, e.
g., the labor-time required for the production of a bushel of wheat
remained constant, while that required for the production of all other
commodities doubled, the exchange value of a bushel of wheat expressed
in its equivalents would become half as large as before. The result
would be practically the same as if the amount of time necessary for
the production of one bushel of wheat had been reduced by one-half,
and that required for all other commodities had remained unchanged.
The value of commodities is determined by the proportion in which they
can be produced in the same labor-time. In order to see what possible
changes this proportion may undergo, let us take two commodities, A and
B.

_First case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodity B remain unchanged. In that case the exchange value of A,
expressed in terms of B, rises and falls with the rise and fall of the
labor-time required for the production of A.

_Second case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodity A remain constant. Then the exchange value of A, expressed in
terms of B, falls and rises in an inverse ratio with the rise and fall
of the labor-time required for the production of B.

_Third case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodities A and B rise and fall in equal proportion. Then the
expression of equivalence of A and B remains unchanged. If through some
cause the productivity of all kinds of labor were to decline uniformly,
so that the production of all commodities would require an equally
increased quantity of labor-time, then the value of all commodities
would rise, though the expression of their exchange values would remain
unchanged, and the actual wealth of society would decrease, because
it would have to expend more labor-time on the production of the same
stock of use-values.

_Fourth case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of A and
B rise and fall, but not uniformly; that is to say, the labor-time
required for the production of A may rise, while that required for B
may fall, or vice versa. All of which can be reduced to the simple
case where the labor-time required for the production of one commodity
remains unchanged, while that required for the other rises or falls.

The exchange value of any commodity is expressed in the use-value of
any other commodity, be it in integral units or in fractions thereof.
As exchange value, every commodity is capable of subdivision, like
the labor-time embodied in it. The equivalence of commodities is
independent of their physical divisibility as use-values, just as the
sum of the exchange values of commodities is indifferent to the change
of form which use-values have to undergo when converted into a _single_
new commodity.

So far we have considered commodities from a twofold point of view,
as use-values and exchange values alternately. But a commodity as such
is a direct combination of use-value and exchange value; and it is a
commodity only in relation to other commodities. The _actual_ relation
between commodities constitutes the _process of their exchange_. It is
a social process participated in by individuals independent of each
other but the part they take in it is that of owners of commodities
only. Their mutual relations are those of their commodities, and thus
they really appear as conscious factors of the process of exchange.

A commodity _is_ a use-value, wheat, linen, a diamond, a machine,
etc., but as a commodity it is, at the same time, _not_ a use-value.
If it were a use-value for its owner, i. e., a direct means for the
satisfaction of his own wants, then it would not be a commodity. To him
it is rather _a non-use-value_; it is merely the material depository of
exchange-value, or simply a _means of exchange_; as an active bearer of
exchange value, use-value becomes a means of exchange. To the owner it
is a use-value only in so far as it constitutes exchange value.[12]

It has yet _to become_ a use-value, viz., to others. Not being a
use-value to its owner, it is a use-value to the owners of other
commodities. If it is not, then the labor expended on it was useless
labor, and the result of that labor is not a commodity. On the other
hand, the commodity must become a use-value _to the owner himself_,
because his means of existence lie outside of it in the use-values of
commodities not belonging to him. In order to become a use-value, the
commodity must meet the particular want of which it is the means of
satisfaction. Use-values of commodities are thus _realized_ use-values
through a universal change of hands by passing from the hands in which
they were held as means of exchange into those where they become use
values. Only through this universal transfer of commodities does the
labor contained in them become useful labor. In this process of their
mutual interchange as use-values, commodities do not acquire any new
economic forms. On the contrary, even the form which marked them as
commodities disappears. Bread, e. g., by changing hands from the baker
to the consumer does not change its identity as bread. On the contrary,
it is only the consumer that begins to regard it as a use-value, as a
certain article of food, while in the hands of the baker it was only
the bearer of an economic relation, a palpable yet transcendental
object. Thus, the only change of form that commodities undergo while
becoming use-values, consists in the fact that they cease to be, as
a matter of form, non-use-values to their owners, and use-values to
those who do not own them. To become use-values commodities must be
universally alienated; they must enter the sphere of exchange; but
they are subject to exchange in their capacity of exchange values.
Hence, in order to be realized as use-values, they must be realized as
exchange values.

While the single commodity appeared from the standpoint of use-value as
something independent, as exchange value it was regarded first of all
in its relation to all other commodities. This relation was, however,
merely theoretical, imaginary. It becomes real only in the process of
exchange. On the other hand, a commodity _is_ an exchange value in so
far as a certain quantity of labor-time has been expended on it, and
it consequently represents _materialized labor-time_. But of itself it
is only materialized individual labor-time of a particular kind, and
not _universal_ labor-time. Therefore, it _is not_ directly an exchange
value, but must first _become_ such. First of all, it is an embodiment
of universal labor-time only in so far as it represents labor-time
applied to a definite useful purpose, i. e., when it represents a
use-value. This was the material condition under which alone labor-time
contained in commodities was regarded as universal social labor.
Thus, while a commodity can become a use-value only after it has been
realized as an exchange value, it can, on the other hand, be realized
as an exchange value only if it proves to be a use-value in the process
of alienation.

A commodity can be alienated as a use-value only to one whom it
serves as a use-value, i. e., as a means of satisfying a certain
want. On the other hand, it is exchanged for another commodity, or,
if we put ourselves on the side of the owner of the other commodity,
it, too, can be alienated, i. e., be realized, only if brought in
contact with that particular want of which it is the object. In the
universal exchange of commodities as _use-values_ the basis for
their mutual relations is in their material difference as distinct
objects which satisfy different wants by their specific properties.
But as mere use-values, they are indifferent to each other, and
are incommensurable. As use-values they can be exchanged only with
reference to certain wants. They are exchangeable only as equivalents,
and they are equivalents only as equal quantities of materialized
labor-time, so that all regard to their natural properties as
use-values and therefore to the relation of the commodities to
particular wants is eliminated. On the contrary, a commodity is
realized as an exchange value by replacing as an equivalent any
definite quantity of any other commodity, regardless of whether it
is a use-value for the owner of the other commodity or not. But to
the owner of the other commodity it is a commodity only in so far
as it is a use-value to him, and it becomes an exchange value to
its owner only in so far as it is a commodity to that other person.
Thus, the same relation appears as a proportion between commodities
as magnitudes of the same denomination, but differing qualitatively;
or, as an expression of their equivalence as embodiments of universal
labor-time, and, at the same time, as a relation of qualitatively
different objects, of use-values intended for the satisfaction of
particular wants, in short, a relation in which they are distinguished
as actual use-values. But this equivalence and non-equivalence mutually
exclude each other. Thus we have before us not only a vicious circle
of problems in which the solution of one implies that of the other, but
a combination of contradicting claims, since the fulfillment of one is
directly connected with that of its opposite.

The process of exchange of commodities must result both in the
unfolding and in the solution of these contradictions, neither of
which, however, can appear in that process in this simple way. We
have only observed how commodities are mutually related to each other
as use-values, i. e., how they appear as use-values _within_ the
process of exchange. The exchange-value, on the contrary, as we have
considered it so far, appeared as an abstraction formed in our own
minds, or―if we may so put it―in the mind of the individual owner
of commodities, which lie stored in his warehouse as use-values,
and weigh upon his conscience as exchange values. In the process of
exchange, however, commodities must be not only use-values, but also
exchange values to one another, and that should appear as their own
mutual relation. The difficulty which we first encountered was that a
commodity must be first alienated and delivered to its purchasers as
a use-value, in order to appear as an exchange value, as materialized
labor, while on the other hand its alienation as use-value implies
its being an exchange value. But let us assume that this difficulty
has been overcome. Suppose the commodity has divested itself of its
use-value, and has thereby fulfilled the material condition of being
socially useful labor, instead of a particular labor of an individual.
In that case, the commodity must become an exchange value, a universal
equivalent, an embodiment of universal labor-time for all other
commodities in the process of exchange, and thus, leaving behind its
limited role of a particular use-value, acquire the ability to be
directly represented in all use-values as its equivalents. But every
commodity is _just such_ a commodity, appearing as a direct incarnation
of universal labor-time by divesting itself of its particular
use-value. On the other hand, however, commodities confront each other
in the process of exchange as particular commodities, as the labor
of private individuals embodied in particular use-values. Universal
labor-time is itself an abstraction, which, as such, does not exist for
commodities.

Let us examine the series of equations in which the exchange value of a
commodity finds its concrete expression, e. g.:

  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee.
  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea.
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread, etc.

These equations simply signify that equal quantities of universal
social labor-time are embodied in one yard of linen, two pounds
of coffee, half a pound of tea, etc. But as a matter of fact the
individual labors which are represented in these particular use-values,
become universal, and, in that form, also social labor, only when they
are actually exchanged for one another in proportion to the labor-time
contained in them. Social labor-time exists in these commodities in
a latent state, so to say, and is first revealed in the process of
exchange. We do not proceed from the labor of individuals as social
labor, but, on the contrary, from special labor of private individuals
which appears as universal social labor only by divesting itself of
its original character in the process of exchange. Universal social
labor is, therefore, no ready-made assumption, but a growing result.
And thus we are confronted with a new difficulty, that on the one
hand commodities must enter the process of exchange as embodiments of
universal labor-time, while, on the other hand, this embodiment of the
labor-time of individuals as social labor-time is itself a result of
the process of exchange.

Every commodity becomes an exchange value by divesting itself of its
use-value, or of its original nature. The commodity must therefore
assume a double capacity in the process of exchange. But that second
capacity of exchange value can appear only in the shape of another
commodity, because only commodities confront each other in the process
of exchange. How is a particular commodity to represent directly
_materialized universal_ labor-time, or―to put it differently―how is
individual labor-time, which is embodied in a particular commodity to
be made directly universal in character? The concrete expression of the
exchange value of a commodity, i. e., of every commodity as a universal
equivalent, is represented in an endless series of equations, such as:

  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee.
  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea.
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread.
  1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico.
  1 yard of linen = etc.

The above form is theoretical in so far as commodities are only
_thought of_ as definite quantities of materialized universal
labor-time. But the capacity of a particular commodity to serve as a
universal equivalent from a mere abstraction becomes a _social_ result
of the process of exchange by a simple inversion of the above series of
equations, viz.:

  2 lbs. of coffee  = 1 yard of linen.
  1/2 lb. of tea    = 1 yard of linen.
  8 lbs. of bread   = 1 yard of linen.
  6 yards of calico = 1 yard of linen.

While coffee, tea, bread, calico, in short, all commodities express
in linen the labor-time contained in them, the exchange value of
linen, on the other hand, unfolds itself in all other commodities as
its equivalents, and the labor-time embodied in it becomes direct
universal labor-time, which is equally expressed in different volumes
of all other commodities. Linen thus becomes the _universal equivalent_
through the _universal action_ of all other commodities upon it.
As exchange value, every commodity served as a measure of value of
all other commodities. Now, on the contrary, since all commodities
measure their exchange values by means of a particular commodity,
this excluded commodity becomes the special expression of exchange
value, as a universal equivalent. At the same time, the endless
series of equations in which the exchange value of every commodity
was expressed, is reduced to one single equation consisting of two
members. The equation 2 lbs. of coffee = 1 yard of linen now fully
expresses the exchange value of coffee, for in this expression a yard
of linen appears as the direct equivalent of a definite quantity
of every other commodity. Thus, within the sphere of exchange all
commodities are or appear to each other as exchange values in the
form of linen. The proposition that commodities, as exchange values,
are to each other as different quantities of materialized universal
labor-time, may now be worded to the effect that commodities, as
exchange values, represent nothing but different quantities of _the
same_ article, linen. Universal labor-time thus assumes the aspect of
a distinct thing, as a commodity existing along with and outside of
all other commodities. At the same time the equation 2 lbs. of coffee
= 1 yard of linen, in which one commodity appears as the exchange
value of another, is yet to be realized. Only by being alienated as
use-value―which depends upon whether it proves to be in the process
of exchange the object of a certain want―does the commodity actually
transform its existence as coffee into the existence as linen and
thus takes on the form of a universal equivalent and becomes, indeed,
an exchange value for all other commodities. Conversely, since all
commodities are turned into linen by being alienated as use-values,
linen becomes the converted form of all other commodities, and only as
a result of this transformation of all other commodities into it, it
becomes the direct _embodiment of universal labor-time_, i. e., the
product of universal exchange and of the elimination of individual
labor. If commodities thus assume a twofold character in order to
appear as exchange values to each other, the commodity which has been
singled out as the universal equivalent becomes, on the other hand, a
use-value in two ways. Besides its special use-value as a particular
commodity, it assumes a universal use-value. This latter kind of
use-value constitutes its special feature, emanating as it does,
from the specific part which the commodity plays as a result of the
universal relation which all other commodities bear toward it in the
process of exchange. The use-value of every commodity as an object of
a particular want, has a different value in different hands, e. g., it
has a different value in the hands of the one who disposes of it, than
in those of the one who acquires it. But the commodity singled out as
the universal equivalent, is now an object of a universal want arising
from the very process of exchange, and it has the same use-value to
everybody, viz., that of serving as the depository of exchange value,
of being a universal means of exchange. Thus we find in one commodity
the solution of the contradiction which is inherent in commodity as
such, namely, of being at one and the same time a particular use-value
and a universal equivalent, and, therefore, a use-value for everybody
or universal use-value. Thus, while all other commodities express their
exchange value in the form of an ideal equation with the excluded
commodity―an equation yet to be realized―the use-value of the special
commodity, although real, appears in the process itself as a mere
form which is yet to be realized through transformation into actual
use-values. Originally the commodity appeared simply as commodity, as
universal labor-time embodied in a particular use-value. In the process
of exchange, all commodities are related to the one excluded commodity
as to a simple commodity, one which appears as the embodiment of
universal labor-time in a particular use-value. Thus, _particular_
commodities become related to one particular commodity as a universal
commodity.[13] In that manner the mutual relations of possessors of
commodities based on the fact that they regard their labor as universal
social labor, takes on the aspect of their relations to commodities as
exchange values; and the mutual relation of commodities as exchange
values appears in the process of exchange as the relation of all of
them to one particular commodity as to a specially adopted means of
expression of their exchange value; again, from the point of view of
that particular commodity the above relation appears as its specific
relation to all other commodities, and, therefore, as its own definite,
spontaneous, social character. The particular commodity which thus
appears as the specially adopted expression of the exchange value
of all other commodities, or the exchange value of commodities as a
particular exclusive commodity, is _money_. Money is a crystallization
of the exchange value of commodities which they themselves form in
the process of exchange. Thus, while commodities become _use-values_
to each other in the process of exchange by casting off all definite
forms and entering into mutual relations in their direct material
shape, they must assume a new form, viz., proceed to the formation of
money in order to appear as _exchange values_ to each other. Money
is not a symbol, no more than the commodity aspect of a use-value
is a symbol. That a social relation of production takes the form of
an object existing outside of individuals, and that the definite
relations into which individuals enter in the process of production
carried on in society, assume the form of specific properties of a
thing, is a perversion and by no means imaginary, but prosaically real,
mystification marking all social forms of labor which creates exchange
value. In money this mystification appears only more strikingly than in
commodities.

The necessary physical properties of the particular commodity in which
the money form of all other commodities is to be crystallized―as far
as they are directly determined by the nature of exchange value―are:
divisibility to any desired extent, homogeneity of its parts, and
uniformity of all the specimens of the commodity. As an embodiment
of universal labor-time it must be homogeneous in its structure
and capable of representing only quantitative differences. Another
necessary property is durability of its use-value, as it must last
through the process of exchange. The precious metals excel in these
qualities. Money not being a result of a scheme or agreement, but
having been produced instinctively in the process of exchange, a great
variety of more or less unsuited commodities had successively performed
its functions. At a certain stage of development of the process
of exchange, the necessity arises for a polar distribution of the
functions of exchange value and use-value among commodities, so that
one commodity e. g. should act as a medium of exchange, while another
is being alienated as a use-value. This necessity brings it about that
one or even several commodities possessing the most generally accepted
use-value, begin, incidentally at first, to play the part of money.
Even if not direct means of satisfying existing wants, their being the
most considerable material constituent part of wealth, insures to them
a more general character than to the other use-values.

Direct barter, the original natural form of exchange, represents rather
the beginning of the transformation of use-values into commodities,
than that of commodities into money. Exchange value has as yet no
form of its own, but is still directly bound up with use-value. This
is manifested in two ways. Production, in its entire organization,
aims at the creation of use-values and not of exchange values, and
it is only when their supply exceeds the measure of consumption that
use-values cease to be use-values, and become means of exchange,
i. e., commodities. At the same time, they become commodities only
within the limits of being direct use-values distributed at opposite
poles, so that the commodities to be exchanged by their possessors
must be use-values to both,―each commodity to its non-possessor. As a
matter of fact, the exchange of commodities originates not within the
primitive communities,[14] but where they end, on their borders at the
few points, where they come in contact with other communities. That is
where barter begins, and from here it strikes back into the interior
of the community, decomposing it. The various use-values which first
become commodities in the barter between different communities, such
as slaves, cattle, metals, constitute therefore in most cases the
first money within those communities themselves. We have seen how
the exchange value of a commodity is manifested the more perfectly
as exchange value, the longer the series of its equivalents or the
_greater_ the sphere of exchange of that commodity. With the gradual
expansion of barter, the increase in the number of exchanges, and
the growing diversification of the commodities drawn into exchange,
commodities develop into exchange values, which leads to the formation
of money and has a destructive effect on direct barter. The economists
are in the habit of ascribing the origin of money to the difficulties
which are encountered in the way of extensive barter, but they forget
that these difficulties arise from the development of exchange value
and from the fact that social labor becomes universal labor. E. g.,
commodities as use-values can not be subdivided at will, a property
which they should possess as exchange values. Or, a commodity belonging
to A may be a use-value to B, while the commodity belonging to B may
not have any use-value to A. Or the owners of the commodities may
need each other’s indivisible goods in unequal proportions. In other
words, under the pretence of analyzing simple barter, economists
bring out certain aspects of the contradiction which is inherent in
commodities as entities simultaneously embodying both use-value and
exchange value. On the other hand, they consistently cling to the
idea that barter is the natural form of exchange, which suffers only
from certain technical difficulties, for which money is a cunningly
devised expedient. Arguing from this perfectly superficial view, an
ingenious English economist has rightly maintained that money is
merely a material instrument like a ship or a steam-engine, but not
an expression of a social relation in the field of production and
consequently not an economic category; and that it is, therefore, wrong
to treat the subject in political economy, which really has nothing in
common with technology.[15]

The world of commodities implies the existence of a highly developed
division of labor; this division is manifested directly in the great
variety of use-values, which confront each other as particular
commodities and which embody as many different kinds of labor. The
division of labor embracing all the particular kinds of productive
occupations, is the complete expression of social labor in its material
aspect viewed as labor creating use-values. But from the standpoint of
commodities and within the process of exchange, it exists only in its
results, in the variety of the commodities themselves.

The exchange of commodities constitutes the social metabolic process,
i. e. the process in which the exchange of the special products of
private individuals is the result of certain social relations of
production into which the individuals enter in this interchange of
matter. As they develop, the mutual relations of commodities crystalize
into various aspects of the universal equivalent and thus the process
of exchange becomes at the same time the process of the formation of
money. The whole of this process which takes the form of a succession
of processes, constitutes circulation.


The analysis of commodities according to their twofold aspect of
use-value and exchange value by which the former is reduced to work
or deliberate productive activity; and the latter, to labor time or
homogeneous social labor, is the result of a century and a half of
critical study by the classical school of political economy which dates
from William Petty in England and Boisguillebert in France[16] and
closes with Ricardo in the former country and Sismondi in the latter.

Petty reduces use-value to labor, without deceiving himself as to the
natural limitation of its creative power. As regards concrete labor,
he sizes it up in the magnitude of its social aspect, as _the division
of labor_.[17] This view of the source of material wealth does not
remain more or less fruitless as in the case of his contemporary,
Hobbes, but leads up to his _Political Arithmetic_, the first form in
which Political Economy is differentiated as an independent science.

He defines exchange value, however, just as it _appears_ in the process
of exchange of commodities, viz. as money; and money he defines as
an existing commodity, gold and silver. Laboring under the ideas of
the monetary system, he declares the special branch of labor which
is devoted to the production of gold and silver as the labor which
determines exchange value. What he really means is that the labor of
members of society must produce not direct use-values, but commodities
or use-values which by means of exchange are capable of assuming the
form of gold and silver, i. e. of money, i. e. of exchange value, i.
e. of embodiments of universal labor. His example, however, shows
strikingly that the recognition of labor as the source of material
wealth by no means excludes the misconception of the particular social
form in which labor constitutes the source of exchange value.

In his turn, Boisguillebert, if not consciously, at any rate actually
reduces the exchange value of a commodity to labor-time, since he
determines “true value” (la juste valeur) by the right proportion in
which the labor-time of individuals is distributed among the several
branches of industry, and defines free competition as the social
process which determines these correct proportions. At the same time,
however, and in contrast with Petty he wages a fanatical war against
money which, by its interference, disturbs the natural equilibrium or
harmony of exchange of commodities and, like a wanton Moloch, demands
all natural wealth as sacrifice. It is true that this assault on money
was called forth by certain historic conditions. Since Boisguillebert
attacked[18] the blind destructive lust after gold which possessed
the court of Louis XIV, his tax collectors, and his nobility; on the
other hand, Petty extolled in the greed of gold the mighty impulse
which spurred on the nation in her industrial development and in her
conquest of the world-market; still, there asserts itself here a
deeper antagonism of principles which constantly recurs between true
English and true French[19] Political Economy. Boisguillebert sees,
in fact, only the material substance of wealth, its use-value, the
enjoyment[20] of it, and considers the capitalistic form of labor, i.
e. the production of use-values as commodities and the exchange of
those commodities, as the natural social form in which individual labor
attains its end. When he is, therefore, confronted with the specific
character of capitalistic wealth as in the case of money, he sees in it
the usurping interference of extraneous elements and gets into a rage
about the capitalist system of labor in one form while utopian-like
he praises it in another.[21] Boisguillebert furnishes us with proof
that one may treat labor-time as the measure of value of commodities,
and at the same time confound labor embodied in the exchange value of
commodities and measured by time, with the direct natural activity of
individuals.

The first sensible analysis of exchange value as labor-time, made so
clear as to seem almost commonplace, is to be found in the work of
a man of the New World where the bourgeois relations of production
imported together with their representatives sprouted rapidly in a
soil which made up its lack of historical traditions with a surplus of
humus. That man was Benjamin Franklin, who formulated the fundamental
law of modern political economy[22] in his first work which he wrote
when a mere youth and published in 1721.

He declares it necessary to look for another measure of value than
precious metals. That measure is labor. “By labor may the value of
silver be measured as well as other things. As, suppose one man
employed to raise corn, while another is digging and refining silver;
at the year’s end, or at any other period of time, the complete produce
of corn, and that of silver, are the natural price of each other; and
if one be twenty bushels, and the other twenty ounces, then an ounce
of that silver is worth the labor of raising a bushel of that corn.
Now if by the discovery of some nearer, more easy or plentiful mines,
a man may get forty ounces of silver as easily as formerly he did
twenty, and the same labor is still required to raise twenty bushels
of corn, then two ounces of silver will be worth no more than the same
labor of raising one bushel of corn, and that bushel of corn will be
as cheap at two ounces, as it was before at one, _ceteris paribus_.
Thus the riches of a country are to be valued by the quantity of labor
its inhabitants are able to purchase.”[23] Thus Franklin regards
labor-time from the one-sided economic point of view, as the measure
of value. The transformation of actual products into exchange values
is self-evident with him and the only question is as to finding a
quantitative measure of value. “Trade,” says he, “in general being
nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all
things is, as I have said before, most justly measured by labour.”[24]
Substitute the word “work” for “labor” in the above statement, and
the confusion of labor in one form and labor in another form becomes
at once apparent. Since trade consists e. g. in the exchange of the
respective labors of the shoemaker, miner, spinner, painter, etc., does
it follow that the value of shoes is most justly measured by the work
of a painter? On the contrary, Franklin meant that the value of shoes,
mining products, yarn, paintings, etc., is determined by abstract labor
which possesses no particular qualities and can, therefore, be measured
only quantitatively.[25] But since he does not develop the idea
that labor contained in exchange value is abstract universal labor
which assumes the form of social labor as a result of the universal
alienation of the products of individual labor, he necessarily fails to
recognize in money the direct embodiment of this alienated labor. For
that reason he sees no inner connection between money and labor which
creates exchange value, and considers money merely as an instrument
introduced from outside into the sphere of exchange for purposes of
technical convenience.[26] Franklin’s analysis of exchange value did
not exert any direct influence on the general trend of science, because
he discussed only special questions of political economy whenever there
was a definite practical occasion for it.

The contrast between useful work and labor which creates exchange
value agitated all Europe during the eighteenth century in the form of
this question: what particular kind of labor constitutes the source
of bourgeois wealth? It was thus assumed that not every kind of labor
which is realized in use-values or yields certain products does
thereby directly create wealth. With the physiocrats, however, as well
as with their opponents, the burning question was not, what kind of
labor creates _value_, but which is it that creates _surplus value_.
They approached the problem in its complicated form before they had
solved it in its elementary form; such is the historical course of
all sciences leading them by a labyrinth of intersecting paths to the
real starting points. Unlike other builders, science not only erects
castles in the air, but constructs separate stories of the building,
before it has laid the foundation. Without dwelling any longer on the
physiocrats and omitting quite a number of Italian economists who in
some more or less ingenious ideas came close to a correct analysis
of the nature of commodity,[27] we pass at once to the first Briton
who elaborated the general system of bourgeois economics, Sir James
Steuart.[28] His idea of exchange value as well as all the abstract
categories of political economy still seem to be with him in the
process of differentiation from the material elements they represent
and therefore appear quite vague and unsettled. In one place he
determines _real value by labor-time_ (“what a workman can perform in
a day”), but immediately creates confusion by introducing the elements
of wages and raw material.[29] In another place his struggle with the
material substance of the subject he treats of is revealed even more
strikingly. He calls the material of nature contained in a commodity,
such as the silver in a silver plate, its “intrinsic worth,” while the
labor-time contained in it he calls “useful value.” The former, he says
“is ... something real in itself,” while “the value of the second must
be estimated according to the labour it has cost to produce it.... The
labour employed in the modification [of the substance] represents a
portion of a man’s time.”[30]

What distinguishes Steuart from his predecessors and followers is
his keen differentiation between specifically social labor which is
represented in exchange value, and concrete labor which produces
use-values. Labor, he says, which through its alienation creates
a universal equivalent, I call _industry_. Labor as industry he
distinguishes not only from concrete labor, but from all other social
forms of labor.[31] It is to him the capitalistic form of labor
in contrast to its antique and mediaeval forms. He is especially
interested in the difference between capitalistic and feudal labor, of
which he had observed the latter in its decaying forms both in Scotland
and on his extensive travels over the continent. Steuart knew, of
course, very well that products took on the form of commodities and
commodities, the form of money in precapitalistic epochs as well; but
he proves conclusively that it is only in the capitalistic period of
production that the commodity becomes the elementary and fundamental
form of wealth, and alienation [of commodities], the ruling form of
acquisition and that consequently labor creating exchange value is
specifically capitalistic in its character.[32]

After different forms of concrete labor, such as agriculture,
manufacture, navigation, trade, etc., had each in turn been declared
the true source of wealth, Adam Smith proclaimed labor in general,
and namely in its general social form of _division of labor_, to be
the only source of material wealth or use-values. While ignoring in
connection with the latter the part played by nature, he is troubled
by it when he comes to deal with purely social wealth i. e. exchange
value. To be sure, Adam determines the value of a commodity by the
labor-time contained in it, but relegates the actual application of
the principle to pre-Adamic times. In other words, what seems to him
true from the standpoint of simple commodity, ceases to be clear as
soon as the higher and more complex forms of capital, wage-labor,
rent, etc. take its place. This he expresses by saying, that the value
of commodities used to be measured by labor-time in the paradise
lost of bourgeois society, in which men dealt with each other not
as capitalists, wage-workers, landlords, tenants, usurers, etc., but
merely as plain producers of commodities which they exchanged. He
constantly confuses the determination of the value of commodities by
the labor-time contained in them with the determination of their value
by the value of labor. He becomes confused in working out the details
and fails to see the objective equalization of different kinds of labor
which the social process forcibly carries out, mistaking it for the
subjective equality of the labors of individuals.[33] The transition
from concrete labor to labor creating exchange value, i. e. to labor in
its fundamental capitalistic form he tries to derive from the _division
of labor_. Yet, while it is true that private exchange implies the
division of labor, it is false to maintain that division of labor
implies private exchange. Among the Peruvians, e. g., labor was divided
to an extraordinary extent, although there was no private exchange, no
exchange of products, as commodities.

Contrary to Adam Smith, David Ricardo elaborated with great clearness
the determination of the value of a commodity by labor-time and showed
that this law governs also such relations of capitalistic production
which seem to contradict it most. Ricardo confines his investigations
exclusively to the _quantitative determination of value_ and as regards
the latter he is at least conscious of the fact that the realization
of the law depends upon certain historical conditions. He says,
namely, that the determination of value by labor-time holds good for
commodities “only as can be increased in quantity by the exertion of
human industry, and on the production of which competition operates
without restraint.”[34] What he really means is that the law of value
presupposes for its full development an industrial society in which
production is carried on a large scale and free competition prevails,
i. e. the modern capitalist society. In all other respects, Ricardo
considers the capitalist form of labor as the eternal natural form of
social labor. He makes the primitive fisherman and the primitive hunter
straightway exchange their fish and game as owners of commodities, in
proportion to the labor-time embodied in these exchange values. On this
occasion he commits the anachronism of making the primitive fisherman
and primitive hunter consult the annuity tables in current use on the
London Exchange in the year 1817 in the calculation relating to their
instruments. The “parallelograms of Mr. Owen” seem to be the only form
of society outside of the bourgeois form with which he was acquainted.
Although confined within this bourgeois horizon, Ricardo analyzes the
bourgeois economy―which looks quite different to deeper insight than
it does on the surface―with such keen power of theoretical penetration
that Lord Brougham could say of him: “Mr. Ricardo seemed as if he had
dropped from another planet.”

In a direct controversy with Ricardo, Sismondi lays stress upon
the specifically social character of labor which creates exchange
value,[35] and says it is “characteristic of our economic progress” to
reduce the magnitude of value to the _necessary_ labor-time, to the
relation between the demand of society as a whole and the quantity of
labor which is sufficient to satisfy this demand.[36] Sismondi is no
more laboring under Boisguillebert’s idea, that labor which creates
exchange value is adulterated by money; but just as Boisguillebert
denounced money, so does Sismondi denounce large industrial capital.
In Ricardo political economy reached its climax, after recklessly
drawing its ultimate conclusions, while Sismondi supplemented it by
impersonating its doubts.

Since Ricardo gave to classical political economy its final shape,
having formulated and elaborated with the greatest clearness the law of
the determination of exchange value by labor-time, it is natural that
all the polemics among economists should center about him. Stripped
of its puerile[37] form this controversy comes down to the following
points:

_First_: Labor itself has exchange value, and different kinds of labor
have different exchange values. We get into a vicious circle by making
exchange value the measure of exchange value, because the measuring
exchange value needs a measure itself. This objection may be reduced
to the following problem: Given labor-time as the intrinsic measure
of exchange value, develop from that the determination of wages. The
theory of wages gives the answer to that.

_Second_: If the exchange value of a product is equal to the labor-time
contained in it, then the exchange value of one day of labor is equal
to the product of that labor. In other words, wages must be equal to
the product of labor.[38] But the very opposite is actually the case.
Ergo. this objection comes down to the following problem: How does
production, based on the determination of exchange value by labor-time
only, lead to the result that the exchange value of labor is less than
the exchange value of its product? This problem is solved by us in the
discussion of capital.

_Third_: The market price of commodities either falls below or rises
above its exchange value with the changing relations of supply and
demand. _Therefore_, the exchange value of commodities is determined by
the relation of supply and demand and not by the labor-time contained
in them. As a matter of fact, this queer conclusion merely amounts to
the question, how a market price based on exchange value can deviate
from that exchange value; or, better still, how does the law of
exchange value assert itself only in its antithesis? This problem is
solved in the theory of competition.

_Fourth_: The last and apparently the most striking objection, if
not raised in the usual form of queer examples: If exchange value
is nothing but mere labor-time contained in commodities, how can
commodities which contain no labor possess exchange-value, or in other
words, whence the exchange value of mere forces of nature? This problem
is solved in the theory of rent.





In a parliamentary debate on Sir Robert Peel’s Bank Act of 1844 and
1845, Gladstone remarked that not even love has made so many fools of
men as the pondering over the nature of money. He spoke of Britons to
Britons. The Dutch, on the contrary, who, from times of yore, have had,
Petty’s doubts notwithstanding, “angelical wits” for money speculation
have never lost their wits in speculations about money.

The main difficulty in the analysis of money is overcome as soon as
the evolution of money from commodity is understood. This point once
granted, it only remains to comprehend clearly the particular forms
of money, which is to some extent made difficult by the fact that all
bourgeois relations, being gilt or silver plated, have the appearance
of money relations, and money, therefore, seems to possess an endless
variety of forms, which have nothing in common with it.

In the following investigation only those forms of money are treated
of which directly grow out of the exchange of commodities; the forms
which belong to a higher stage of production, as e. g., credit money
will not be discussed here. For the sake of simplicity gold is assumed
throughout as the money commodity.


The first process of circulation constitutes, so to say, the
theoretical preparatory process to actual circulation. To begin
with, commodities which are use-values by nature, acquire a form in
which they _appear_ in idea to each other as exchange values, as
definite quantities of incorporated _universal_ labor-time. The first
necessary step in this process is, as we have seen, the setting apart
by the commodities of a specific commodity, say _gold_, as the direct
incarnation of universal labor-time, or the universal equivalent. Let
us go back for a moment to the form in which commodities turn gold into
money.

  1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold

  1 quarter of wheat = 1 ounce of gold

  1 hundred weight of Mocca coffee = 1-1/4 ounce of gold

  1 hundred weight of potash = 1/2 ounce of gold

  1 ton of Brazil timber = 1-1/2 ounces of gold

  Y commodities = X ounces of gold

In the above series of equations iron, wheat, coffee, potash, etc.
appear to each other as embodiments, of homogeneous labor, namely,
as labor materialized in money, from which all the peculiarities of
the different kinds of concrete labor represented in the different
use-values are completely eliminated. As value they are all identical,
they are the incarnation of _the same_ labor, or _the same_ incarnation
of labor, viz., gold. As uniform embodiments of the same labor they
display only _one_ difference, a quantitative one, by appearing
as different quantities of value, because _unequal_ quantities of
labor-time are contained in their use-values. The mutual relation
of these separate commodities is that of embodiments of universal
labor-time, since they are related to universal labor-time as to an
excluded commodity, viz., gold. The same relation the development of
which causes commodities to appear to each other as exchange values,
causes the labor time contained in gold to appear as universal
labor-time, a given quantity of which is expressed in different
quantities of iron, wheat, coffee, etc,―in short, in the use-values
of all commodities, or is directly unfolded in the endless series of
commodity-equivalents. While all commodities express their exchange
values in gold, gold expresses its exchange value directly in all
commodities. While commodities assume the form of exchange value in
relation to each other, they lend to gold the form of the universal
equivalent, or of money.

Gold becomes the _measure of value_, because _all_ commodities measure
their exchange values in gold, in proportion as a certain quantity of
gold and a certain quantity of the commodity contain the same amount
of labor-time; and it is only by virtue of this function of being a
measure of value, in which capacity its own value is measured directly
in the entire series of commodity equivalents, that gold becomes
a universal equivalent or money. On the other hand, the exchange
value of all commodities is expressed in gold. In this expression,
the qualitative aspect is to be distinguished from the quantitative:
there is the exchange value of the commodity as the embodiment of the
same uniform labor-time; while the magnitude of value is exhaustively
expressed, since in the same proportion in which commodities are
equated to gold they are equated to one another. On the one hand the
_universal_ character of the labor-time contained in them is revealed;
on the other, its quantity is expressed in its golden equivalent. The
exchange value of commodities thus expressed in the form of a universal
equivalent and, moreover, as a numerical proportion of this equivalent,
in terms of one specific commodity, or represented in the form of a
series of commodities equated to one specific commodity, is PRICE.
Price is the form into which the exchange value of commodities is
converted when it _appears_ within the sphere of circulation.

By the same process by which commodities express their values in gold
prices, they turn gold into a measure of value i. e. into money. If
all of them were to measure their values in silver, wheat, or copper,
and therefore express them in the form of silver, wheat or copper
prices, then silver, wheat or copper would be measures of value and
consequently universal equivalents. In order to appear as prices in
circulation, commodities must be exchange values before they enter
circulation. Gold becomes the measure of value only because all
commodities estimate their exchange value in it.

The universality of this relation which is the result of evolution
and from which alone springs the function of gold as the measure of
value, implies however, that every single commodity is measured in
gold, in proportion to the labor-time contained in both; that the
actual common measure of the commodity and of gold is labor; or that
commodity and gold are passed for each other in direct barter as
equal exchange values. How this equalization actually takes place,
can not be discussed here when treating of simple circulation. So
much, however, is clear, that in countries producing gold and silver,
certain quantities of labor-time are directly embodied in definite
quantities of gold and silver, while in countries which do not produce
gold and silver the same result is reached in a round-about way, by
direct or indirect exchange of the commodities of those countries;
i. e. a definite portion of average national labor is given for a
definite quantity of labor-time, embodied in the gold and silver of the
mine-owning countries. In order to be able to serve as a measure of
value, gold must be as far as possible a _variable_ value, because it
can become the equivalent of other commodities only as an incarnation
of labor-time, and the same labor-time is realized in unequal volumes
of use-values with the change in the productive power of concrete
labor. In estimating all commodities in gold it is only assumed that
gold represents a given quantity of labor at a given moment, as was
done when the exchange value of any commodity was expressed in terms
of the use-value of any other commodity. As for the variations of the
value of gold, the law of exchange value formulated above holds good
in its case as well. If the exchange value of commodities remains
unchanged, then a general rise in their gold prices is possible only
in the case of a fall in the exchange value of gold. If the exchange
value of gold remains unchanged, a general rise of gold prices is
possible only when the exchange value of all commodities rises. The
reverse is true in case of a general fall in the prices of commodities.
If the value of an ounce of gold falls or rises in consequence of a
change in the labor-time required for its production, then the values
of all other commodities fall or rise to an equal extent. Thus, the
ounce of gold represents after the change, as it did before, a _given_
quantity of labor-time with regard to all commodities. The same
exchange values are now estimated in greater or smaller quantities
of gold than before, but they are estimated in proportion to the
magnitude of their values, and consequently retain the same proportion
to each other. The ratio 2 ÷ 4 ÷ 8 remains the same when expressed
as 1 ÷ 2 ÷ 4 or as 4 ÷ 8 ÷ 16. The change in the quantity of gold in
which exchange values are estimated with a variation in the value of
gold, interferes as little with the function of gold as a measure
of value, as the fifteen times smaller value of silver as compared
with that of gold interferes with the performance of that function
by the latter. Since labor-time is the common measure of gold and
commodities, and since gold figures as the measure of value only in so
far as all commodities are measured by it, the idea that money makes
commodities commensurable, is therefore a mere fiction of the process
of circulation.[39] It is rather the commensurability of commodities
as incorporated labor-time, that turns gold into money.

Commodities enter the process of exchange in the concrete form
of use-values. They are yet to be turned into the real universal
equivalent through their alienation. The determination of their prices
merely amounts to their ideal transformation into the universal
equivalent, a process of equation to gold which is yet to be realized.
But since commodities are, in their prices, transformed into gold only
in imagination, or are converted only into imaginary gold, and since
their money form is not differentiated as yet from their concrete
selves, it follows that gold has also been turned into money only
in imagination; it appears so far but as a measure of value, and in
fact definite quantities of gold serve merely as names for certain
quantities of labor-time. The form in which gold is crystallized in
money always depends upon the way in which commodities express their
own exchange value to each other.

Commodities now confront one another in a double capacity: actually as
use-values, ideally as exchange values. The twofold aspect of labor
contained in them is reflected in their mutual relations; the special
concrete labor being virtually present as their use-value, while
universal abstract labor-time is ideally represented in their price
in which commodities appear as commensurable embodiments of the same
value―substance differing merely in quantity.

The difference between exchange value and price appears to be merely
nominal or, as Adam Smith says, labor is the real price, and money
the nominal price of commodities. Instead of estimating the value of
one quarter of wheat in thirty days of labor, it is estimated in one
ounce of gold if one ounce of gold is the product of thirty days’
labor. However, far from this difference being merely nominal, all the
storms which threaten commodities in the actual process of circulation
center about it. Thirty days of labor are contained in a quarter of
wheat and it need not, therefore, be expressed in terms of labor-time.
But gold is a commodity distinct from wheat, and only in circulation
it can be ascertained, whether the quarter of wheat can be actually
turned into an ounce of gold as is anticipated in its price. That will
depend on whether or not it proves to be a use-value, whether or not
the quantity of labor-time contained in it is the quantity necessarily
required by society for the production of a quarter of wheat. The
commodity as such _is_ an exchange value, it _has_ a price. In this
difference between exchange value and price lies the demonstration of
the fact that the particular individual labor contained in a commodity
has first to be expressed through the process of alienation in terms
of its counterpart, i. e. as impersonal, abstract, universal and, only
in that form, social labor, viz. money. Whether it can be so expressed
seems to be a matter of chance. Thus, although the exchange value
of a commodity finds only ideally a distinct expression in price,
and the twofold character of labor contained in the commodity exists
as yet merely as two distinct forms of expression, and, although in
consequence thereof, the embodiment of universal labor-time, gold,
confronts actual commodities only as an imaginary measure of value, yet
the fact that exchange value exists as price, or that gold exists as a
measure of value implies the necessity of the alienation of commodities
for hard cash and the possibility of their non-alienation. In short,
here lies latent the entire contradiction which is inherent in the
fact that products are commodities or that the particular work of a
private individual can be of no account in society until it has taken
the very opposite form of abstract universal labor. For that reason,
the utopians, who want to have commodities but not money, who want a
system of production based on private exchange without the necessary
conditions underlying such a system, are consistent when they “destroy”
money not in its tangible form but in its nebulous illusory form of a
measure of value. Under the invisible measure of value there lurks the
hard cash.

The process by which gold has become the measure of value and exchange
value has been turned into price, being once assumed, all commodities
express in their prices but imagined quantities of gold of various
magnitudes. As such various quantities of the same thing, gold, they
are equated, compared and measured with each other, and thus arises the
technical necessity of referring them to a definite quantity of gold
as a unit of measure, a unit which develops into a standard measure by
virtue of its divisibility into aliquot parts, which in their turn can
be subdivided into aliquot parts.[40] But quantities of gold as such
are measured by weight.

The standard of measure is thus found ready in the general measures
of weight of metals and, therefore, where-ever metallic circulation
is in vogue, these measures serve originally as standards of price.
Since commodities no more relate to each other as exchange values to
be measured by labor-time, but as magnitudes of the same denomination
measured in gold, the latter is transformed from a _measure of value_
into a _standard of price_. The comparison of prices with each other
as different quantities of gold is thus crystallized in figures which
correspond to an assumed quantity of gold and represent it as a
standard of aliquot parts. Gold as measure of value and as standard of
price has entirely different forms of manifestation and the confusing
of the two has resulted in the wildest of theories. Gold is a measure
of value as incorporated labor-time; it is the standard of price as
certain weight of metal. Gold becomes the measure of value by virtue
of its relation as exchange value to commodities as exchange values;
as standard of price, a definite quantity of gold serves as a unit
for other quantities of gold. Gold is the measure of value, because
its value is variable; it is the standard of price, because it is
fixed as a constant unit of weight. In this case, as in all cases of
measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of a
definite and unvarying unit of measure is all-important. The necessity
of settling upon a quantity of gold as a unit of measure and upon its
aliquot parts as subdivisions of that unit, has given rise to the
notion that a certain quantity of gold which has naturally a variable
value had been assigned a fixed ratio of value to the exchange values
of all commodities; the fact is overlooked that exchange values of
commodities are transformed into prices, i. e. into quantities of gold,
before gold develops as a standard of price. No matter how the value of
gold may vary, the ratios between the values of different quantities of
gold remain constant. Let the fall in the value of gold amount to 1000
per cent., still twelve ounces of gold will have a twelve times greater
value than one ounce of gold; and in prices the only thing considered
is the ratio between different quantities of gold. Since, on the other
hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its
weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot
parts. Thus gold always renders the same service as an invariable
standard of price, no matter how much its value may vary.[41]

An historical process which, as we shall explain later, was determined
by the nature of metallic circulation, led to the result that the
same denomination of weight was retained for a constantly changing
and decreasing weight of precious metals in their function of a
standard of price. Thus the English pound sterling denotes less than
one-third of its original weight; the pound Scot, before the Union,
only 1-36; the French livre, 1-74; the Spanish Maravedi, less than
1-1000; the Portuguese Rei, a still smaller fraction. Such was the
historical origin of the discrepancy between the current money names
of various weights of metals and their weight denominations.[42]
Since the determination of the unit of measure, of its aliquot parts,
and of their names is purely conventional, and since they should
possess within the sphere of circulation the character of universality
and compulsion, they had to be settled _by law_. The purely formal
operation thus devolved upon the government.[43] The metal which
was to serve as the money material, was found already adopted in
the community. In different countries the legal standard of price
is naturally different. In England e. g. the ounce as a weight of
metal is divided into pennyweights, grains and carats Troy, but the
ounce of gold as the unit of money is divided into 3 7-8 sovereigns,
the sovereign into 20 shillings, the shilling into 12 pence, so that
100 pounds of 22 carat gold (1200 ounces) = 4672 sovereigns and 10
shillings. In the world market, however, where national boundaries
disappear, these national characteristics of the measure of money also
disappear and give place to the general measures of weight of metals.

The price of a commodity or the quantity of gold into which it is
ideally transformed, is, therefore, now expressed in the names of
coins of the gold standard. Thus, instead of saying: a quarter of
wheat is worth an ounce of gold, it is said in England to be worth 3£
17s. 10-1/2d. All prices are thus expressed in the same denominations.
The peculiar form which commodities lend to their exchange values is
transformed into a _money-denomination_ by which commodities tell each
other how much they are worth. Money in its turn becomes _money of
account_.[44]

We transform commodities into money of account, in our mind, on paper,
in conversation, whenever it is a question of expressing any kind of
wealth in terms of exchange value.[45] For that transformation we need
the gold substance, but only in imagination. In order to estimate the
value of a thousand bales of cotton in a certain number of ounces of
gold and then to express this number of ounces in the denominations of
the ounce, £. s. d., not a single atom of gold is required. Thus, not
a single ounce of gold was in circulation in Scotland before Robert
Peel’s Bank Act of 1845, although the gold ounce, expressed in its
English standard of account, 3£ 17s. 10-1/2d., served as the legal
standard of price. In a similar manner silver serves as standard of
price in the trade between Siberia and China, although that trade
virtually amounts to barter. It is, therefore, immaterial to money,
as money of account, whether or not its entire unit of measure or the
fractions thereof are really coined. In England, at the time of William
the Conqueror, 1£, then a pound of pure silver, and the shilling, 1-20
of a pound, existed only as money of account, while the penny, 1-240
of a pound of silver, was the largest silver coin in existence. On
the other hand, there are no shillings and pence in England to-day,
although they are legal denominations for certain parts of an ounce of
gold. Money as money of account may exist exclusively in idea, while
the money in actual existence may be coined according to an entirely
different standard. Thus the money in circulation in many English
colonies of North America consisted until late in the eighteenth
century of Spanish and Portuguese coins, although the money of account
was throughout the same as in England.[46]

Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard of price,
appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities,
and that, therefore, the sum of 3£ 17s. 10-1/2d. may signify, on
the one hand, an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value
of a ton of iron, this reckoning name of money has been called its
_mint-price_. Hence, there sprang up the extraordinary notion that
the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in
contradistinction to all other commodities, its price is _fixed_ by
the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning
names to definite weights of gold is the same thing as fixing the
value of those weights.[47] In so far as gold serves as one of the
elements in determining price, i. e., where it performs the function
of money of account, it not only has no _fixed_ price, but has _no_
price whatever. In order to have a price, i. e., in order to express
itself in a _specific_ commodity as a _universal_ equivalent that
other commodity would have to play the same exclusive role in the
process of circulation as gold. But two commodities excluding all other
commodities mutually exclude each other. Therefore, wherever gold and
silver have by law been made to perform side by side the function of
money or of a measure of value it has always been tried, but in vain,
to treat them as one and the same material. To assume that there is an
invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a
given quantity of labor-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact,
that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given
mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a
given mass of gold. From the reign of Edward III to the time of George
II, the history of money in England consists of one long series of
perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between
the values of gold and silver, with the fluctuations in their real
values. At one time gold was too high; at another, silver. The metal
that for the time being was estimated below its value was withdrawn
from circulation, melted and exported. The ratio between the two metals
was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ratio soon came into
conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the slight and
transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which was a
consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far
more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver,
and its expulsion from circulation by gold. During the years 1855,
1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold imports over gold exports
amounted to £41,580,000, while the excess of silver exports over silver
imports was £14,704,000. In fact, in those countries in which both
metals are legally measures of value, and therefore both legal tender,
so that every one has the option of paying in either metal, the metal
that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every other commodity,
measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone serves
in reality as the standard of value. The result of all experience
and history with regard to this question is simply that, where two
commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in
practice one alone maintains that position.[48]


The circumstance that commodities are converted into gold only in ideas
as prices and that gold is therefore turned into money only in idea,
gave rise to the theory of the _ideal unit of measure of money_. Since,
in the determination of prices, gold and silver serve only ideally
as money of account, it was asserted that the names pound, shilling,
pence, thaler, franc, etc., instead of denoting certain weights of
gold and silver or labor incorporated in some way, stood rather for
ideal atoms of value. Thus, if, e. g., the value of an ounce of silver
should rise it would contain more such atoms and would therefore have
to be estimated and coined in a greater number of shillings. This
doctrine, revived again during the last commercial crisis in England
and even voiced in Parliament in two separate reports attached to the
report of the select Committee on the Bank Acts sitting in July, 1858,
dates from the end of the seventeenth century.

At the time of the accession of William III., the English mint-price
of an ounce of silver was 5s. 2d., or 1-62 of an ounce of silver was
equal to a penny; 12 of these pence were called a shilling. According
to that standard, a piece of silver weighing, say, 6 ounces, would be
coined into thirty-one coins, each called a shilling. But the _market
price_ of an ounce of silver rose above its _mint price_, from 5s. 2d.
to 6s. 3d., or, in order to buy an ounce of silver bullion 6s. 3d. had
to be paid. How could the market price of an ounce of silver rise above
its mint price, when the mint price is merely a reckoning name for
aliquot parts of an ounce of silver? The riddle was easily solved. Out
of £5,600,000 of silver money which was in circulation at that time,
four millions were worn out, clipped and debased. A trial disclosed
that £57,000 of silver which were supposed to weigh 220,000 ounces,
weighed only 141,000 ounces. The mint went on coining according to
the same standard, but light-weighted shillings in actual circulation
represented smaller parts of an ounce than their name implied. Hence,
a greater quantity of these light-weighted shillings had to be paid in
the market for an ounce of silver bullion. When a general recoinage
was decided upon in consequence of the derangement that had been
produced, LOWNDES, the Secretary of the Treasury, declared that the
value of an ounce of silver had risen and therefore it must henceforth
be coined into 6s. 3d. instead of into 5s. 2d. as heretofore. His
argument practically amounted to the assertion that the rise in the
value of the ounce caused a fall in the value of its aliquot parts.
His false theory, however, served merely as an embellishment for a
just, practical purpose. The government debts were contracted in light
shillings, were they to be paid in heavy ones? Instead of saying pay
back four ounces of silver, when you had received nominally five ounces
but virtually only four, he said pay back nominally five ounces but
reduce the metallic contents to four ounces and call a shilling what
you had called four-fifths of a shilling heretofore. Thus Lowndes
practically adhered to the metallic weight while theoretically he clung
to the reckoning name. His adversaries who clung only to the name
and therefore declared the 25 to 50 per cent. lighter shilling to be
identical with the full-weight shilling maintained on the contrary that
they adhered to the metallic weight.

JOHN LOCKE, who was an advocate of the new bourgeoisie in all forms,
the manufacturers against the working classes and paupers, the
commercial class against the old fashioned usurers, the financial
aristocracy against the state debtors, and who went so far as to prove
in his own work that the bourgeois reason is the normal human reason,
also took up the challenge against Lowndes. John Locke carried the day
and money borrowed at ten or fourteen shillings to a guinea was repaid
in guineas of twenty shillings.[49] SIR JAMES STEUART sums up the
entire transaction as follows: “ ... the state gained considerably upon
the score of taxes, as well as the creditors upon their capitals and
interest; and the nation, which was the principal loser, was pleased;
because their _standard_ (The standard of their own value) was not
debased.”[50] Steuart thought that the nation would prove more alert
with the further development of commerce. He was mistaken. About 120
years later the same _quid pro quo_ was repeated.

It was just in the order of things that Bishop BERKELEY, the
representative of a mystical idealism in English philosophy, should
have given a theoretical turn to the doctrine of the ideal unit
of measure of money, something which the practical “Secretary to
the Treasury” had failed to do. He asks: “Whether the terms Crown,
Livre, Pound Sterling, etc., are not to be considered as Exponents
or Denominations of such Proportion? [namely proportions of abstract
value as such.] And whether Gold, Silver, and Paper are not Tickets
or Counters for Reckoning, Recording and Transferring thereof? (of
the proportion of value). Whether _Power_ to command the Industry of
others be not real Wealth? And whether Money be not in Truth, Tickets
or Tokens for conveying and recording such Power, and whether it be of
great consequence what Materials the Tickets are made of?”[51] Here
we find a confusion, first of the measure of value and the standard
of price, and secondly of gold and silver as measures on the one hand
and mediums of circulation on the other. Because precious metals can
be replaced by tokens in the process of circulation Berkeley comes to
the conclusion that these tokens represent nothing, i. e., only the
abstract idea of value.

SIR JAMES STEUART had so fully developed the theory of the ideal
unit of measure of money, that his successors―unconscious successors
since they do not know him―have added to it neither a new version
nor even a new example. “Money, which I call of account, is no more
than an arbitrary scale of equal parts, invented for measuring the
respective value of things vendible. Money of account, therefore, is
quite a different thing from money coin, which is price[52] and might
exist, although there was no such thing in the world as any substance
which could become an adequate and proportional equivalent, for every
commodity.... Money of account ... performs the same office with
regard to the value of things, that degrees, minutes, seconds, etc.,
do with regard to angles, or as scales do to geographical maps, or to
plans of any kind. In all these inventions, there is constantly some
denomination taken for the unit. ... The usefulness of all those
inventions being solely confined to the marking of proportion. Just so
the unit in money can have no invariable determinate proportion to any
part of value, that is to say, it cannot be fixed to any particular
quantity of gold, silver, or any other commodity whatsoever. The
unit once fixed, we can, by multiplying it, ascend to the greatest
value.... The value of commodities, therefore, depending upon a
general combination of circumstances relative to themselves and to the
fancies of men, their value ought to be considered as changing only
with respect to one another; consequently, anything which troubles or
perplexes the ascertaining those changes of proportion by the means
of a general, determinate and invariable scale, must be hurtful to
trade.... Money ... is an ideal scale of equal parts. If it be demanded
what ought to be the standard value of one part? I answer by putting
another question: What is the standard length of a degree, a minute, a
second? It has none ... but so soon as one part becomes determined by
the nature of a scale, all the rest must follow in proportion. Of this
kind of money ... we have two examples. The bank of Amsterdam presents
us with the one, the coast of Angola with the other.”[53]

Steuart speaks here simply of the part money plays in circulation
as the _standard of price_ and _money of account_. If different
commodities are marked in the price-list at 15s., 20s., 36s.,
respectively, then I care, in fact, neither for the silver substance,
nor for the name of the shilling when comparing the magnitudes of their
values. The ratios between the numbers 15, 20, 36, tell everything, and
the number 1 has become the only unit of measure. Only the abstract
proportion of numbers can at all serve as a purely abstract expression
of proportion. In order to be consistent, Steuart should have dropped
not only gold and silver, but their legal baptismal names as well.
Since he does not understand the nature of the transformation of the
measure of value into a standard of price, he naturally believes that
the definite quantity of gold which serves as a unit of measure relates
as a measure not to other quantities of gold, but to values as such.
Since commodities appear as quantities of the same denomination through
the conversion of their exchange values into prices, he denies that
property of the measure which reduces them to one denomination; and
since in this comparison of different quantities of gold the quantity
of gold which serves as a unit of measure is conventional, he does not
see the necessity of fixing it at all. Instead of calling 1-360 part
of a circle degree, he might give that name to 1-180th part; the right
angle would then be measured by 45 degrees instead of 90, and acute and
obtuse angles would be measured accordingly. Nevertheless, the measure
of the angle would remain, then, as before, first a qualitatively
definite mathematical figure, the circle, and second a quantitatively
definite part of the circle. As for Steuart’s economic illustrations,
he refutes his own argument with one and does not prove anything with
the other. The bank money of Amsterdam was, in fact, merely the
reckoning name for Spanish doubloons, which retained their full weight
by lying idly in the bank vaults, while the circulating coins became
thinner from hard rubbing against the outer world. And as for the
African idealists we have to abandon them to their fate until critical
travelers will tell us more about them.[54] The French assignat
could be called an almost ideal money in Steuart’s sense: “_National
property. Assignation of 100 francs._” To be sure, the use-value which
the assignation was supposed to represent, namely, the confiscated
land, was indicated here, but the quantitative definition of the unit
of measure was forgotten and “the franc” became a meaningless word.
How much or how little land the assignation franc represented depended
on the results of the public auctions. In practice, however, the
assignation franc circulated as a token of value of silver money and
its depreciation was, therefore, measured by this silver standard.

The period of the suspension of cash payments by the Bank of England
was hardly more fruitful of war-bulletins than of money theories. The
depreciation of bank notes and the rise of the market price of gold
above its mint price called forth again the doctrine of the ideal
unit of money on the part of some of the advocates of the Bank. Lord
Castlereagh found the classical confused expression for the confused
idea by speaking of the unit of measure of money as “a sense of value
in reference to currency as compared with commodities.” When a few
years after the peace of Paris conditions permitted the resumption of
cash payments, the same question which had been stirred up by Lowndes
under William III., came up, hardly changed in form. An enormous
government debt, as well as a mass of private debts, accumulated in
twenty years, fixed obligations, etc., had been contracted on the
basis of depreciated bank notes. Were they to be paid back in bank
notes of which £4672, 10s. nominal, actually represented 100 pounds
of 22 carat gold? THOMAS ATTWOOD, a banker of Birmingham, came forth
as _Lowndes redivivus_. The creditors were to receive nominally as
many shillings as had been nominally borrowed, but if about 1-78 of
an ounce of gold constituted a shilling according to the old standard
of coinage, then say 1-90 of an ounce should now be christened a
shilling. Attwood’s adherents are known as the Birmingham school of
“little shillingmen.” The controversy over the ideal money unit, which
had started in 1819, still went on in 1845 between Sir Robert Peel and
Attwood, whose own wisdom, as far as the function of money as a measure
is concerned, is exhaustively summed up in the following passage, in
which, referring to Sir Robert Peel’s controversy with the Birmingham
Chamber of Commerce, he says: “The substance of your queries is ...
in what sense is the word pound to be used?... To what will the sum
one pound be equivalent?... Before I venture a reply I must enquire
what constitutes a standard of value?... Is £3 17s. 10-1/2d. an _ounce_
of gold, or is it only of the _value_ of an ounce of gold? If £3 17s.
10-1/2d. be an ounce of gold, why not call things by their proper
names, and, dropping the terms pounds, shillings and pence, say ounces,
pennyweights and grains?... If we adopt the terms ounces, pennyweights
and grains of gold, as our monetary system, we should pursue a direct
system of barter.... But if gold be estimated as of the _value_ of
£3 17s. 10-1/2d. per ounce ... how is this ... that much difficulty
has been experienced at different periods to check gold from rising
to £5 4s. per ounce, and we now notice that gold is quoted at £3 17s.
9d. per ounce?... The expression _pound_ has reference to value, but
not a fixed standard value.... The term pound is the _ideal unit_....
Labour is the parent of cost and gives the relative value to gold or
iron. _Whatever denomination of words are used to express the daily or
weekly labour of a man_, such words express the cost of the commodity
produced.”[55]

In the last words the hazy conception of the ideal money measure melts
away and its real meaning breaks through. The reckoning names of gold,
pound sterling, shilling, etc., should be names for definite quantities
of labor-time. Since labor-time constitutes the substance and the
intrinsic measure of values, these names would then actually represent
definite proportions of value. In other words, labor-time is maintained
to be the true unit of measure of money. With this we leave the
Birmingham school, but should add in passing that the doctrine of the
ideal measure of money acquired new importance in the controversy over
the question of the convertibility or non-convertibility of bank notes.
If paper receives its name from gold or silver, then the convertibility
of a note or its exchangeability for gold or silver remains an economic
law, no matter what the civil law may be. Thus a Prussian paper thaler,
although legally inconvertible, would immediately depreciate if it were
worth less than a silver thaler in ordinary trade, i. e., if it were
not practically convertible. The consistent advocates of inconvertible
paper money in England, therefore, sought refuge in the ideal measure
of money. If the reckoning names of money, £, s., etc., are names of
certain quantities of atoms of value, of which a commodity absorbs or
loses now more, now less in exchange for other commodities, then an
English £5 note, e. g., is just as independent of its relation to gold
as of that to iron and cotton. Since its title would no more imply
its theoretical equality with a certain quantity of gold or any other
commodity, the demand for its convertibility, i. e., for its practical
equality with a definite quantity of a specified thing would be
excluded by the very conception of the note.

The theory of labor-time as the direct measure of money was first
systematically developed by JOHN GRAY.[56] He makes a National Central
Bank ascertain through its branches the labor-time consumed in the
production of various commodities. The producer receives an official
certificate of value in exchange for his commodity. i. e., he gets a
receipt for as much labor-time as his commodity contains,[57] and these
bank notes of one week’s labor, one day’s labor, one hour’s labor,
etc., serve at the same time as a check for an equivalent in all other
commodities stored in the bank warehouses.[58] This is the fundamental
principle carefully worked out in detail and based throughout on
existing English institutions. Under this system, says Gray, “to
sell for money may be rendered, at all times, precisely as easy as it
now is to buy with money; ... production would become the uniform and
never-failing cause of demand.”[59] The precious metals would lose
their “privilege” as against other commodities and “take their proper
place in the market beside butter and eggs, and cloth and calico, and
then the value of the precious metals will concern us just as little
... as the value of the diamond.”[60] “Shall we retain our fictitious
standard of value, gold, and thus keep the productive resources of the
country in bondage? or, shall we resort to the natural standard of
value, labour, and thereby set our productive resources free?”[61]

Labor-time being the intrinsic measure of value, why should there be
another external measure side by side with it? Why does exchange value
develop into price? Why do all commodities estimate their value in one
exclusive commodity, which is thus converted into a special embodiment
of exchange value into money? That was the problem which Gray had
to solve. Instead of solving it, he imagined that commodities could
be related directly to each other as products of social labor. But
they can relate to each other only in their capacity of commodities.
Commodities are the direct products of isolated independent private
labors, which have to be realized as universal social labor through
their alienation in the process of private exchange, that is to say,
labor based on the production of commodities becomes social labor only
through universal alienation of individual labors. But by assuming
that the labor-time contained in commodities is _directly social_
labor-time, Gray assumes it to be common labor-time or labor-time of
directly associated individuals. Under such conditions a specific
commodity like gold or silver could not confront other commodities as
the incarnation of universal labor, and exchange value would not be
turned into price; but, on the other hand, use-value would not become
exchange value, products would not become commodities and thus the
very foundation of the capitalistic system of production would be
removed. But that is not what Gray has in mind. _Products are to be
produced as commodities, but are not to be exchanged as commodities._
He entrusts a national bank with the carrying out of this pious
wish. On the one hand, society, through the bank, makes individuals
independent of the conditions of private exchange, and on the other,
it allows them to go on producing on the basis of private exchange.
The logic of things, however, compels Gray to do away with one
condition of capitalistic production after another, although he wishes
to “reform” only the money system which results from the exchange of
commodities. Thus he transforms capital into national capital,[62]
land into national property,[63] and if his bank is to be watched
closely, it will be found that it not only receives commodities with
one hand and issues certificates for work delivered with the other, but
that it regulates production as well. In his last work, “Lectures on
Money,” in which Gray is anxious to demonstrate that his labor-money
is a purely bourgeois reform, he gets tangled up in even more glaring
contradictions.

Every commodity is directly money. That was Gray’s theory deducted
from his incomplete and, therefore, false analysis of commodities.
The “organic” structure of “labor money,” the “national bank” and the
“ware-docks” are mere fantastic visions in which the dogma is made
by a legerdemain to appear to us as a universal law. The dogma that
a commodity is money or that the isolated labor of the individual
contained in it is direct social labor, will of course not become
true through the mere fact that a bank believes in it and carries on
operations accordingly. It is more likely that bankruptcy would play
in that case the part of the practical critic. What remains concealed
in Gray’s writings and hidden from himself as well, namely, that
labor-money is a well-sounding economic phrase for the pious wish to
get rid of money, and with money, of exchange value, and with exchange
value, of commodities, and with commodities, of the capitalistic mode
of production, was clearly expressed by some English socialists of whom
a few preceded and others followed Gray.[64]

But it remained for Mr. Proudhon and his school to preach in
all earnest the degradation of _money_ and the exaltation of the
_commodity_ as the gist of socialism and thus to reduce socialism to an
elementary misconception of the necessary connection between commodity
and money.[65]


After the commodity has received in the process of price determination
the form in which it becomes capable of circulation, and after gold has
acquired the character of money in the same process, circulation will
both present and solve the contradictions which are inherent in the
process of exchange of commodities. The actual exchange of commodities,
i. e., the social interchange of matter consists of a change of form in
which is unfolded the double character of the commodity as use-value
and exchange value, and at the same time its own change of form is
crystallized in distinct forms of money. To describe this change of
form is to describe circulation. As we have seen, given a world of
commodities and with it a system of division of labor, commodity is but
a developed form of exchange value; in the same manner, circulation
implies a steady stream of exchange transactions which are being
continually renewed on all sides. The second assumption we make is that
commodities enter the process of exchange with a _definite price_ or
that they appear to each other in that process in a double capacity,
really as use-values, ideally―in price―as exchange values.

The liveliest streets of London are crowded with stores whose show
windows are filled with the riches of the world, Indian shawls,
American revolvers, Chinese porcelain, Parisian corsets, Russian furs
and tropical spices, but all of these things of joy bear fatal white
labels marked with Arabian figures with the laconic characters £, s.,
d. Such is the picture of the commodity appearing in circulation.


On close examination the process of circulation is seen to consist of
two distinct cycles. If we denote commodity by the letter C and money
by the letter M we can express these two forms as follows:

In this chapter we are interested exclusively in the first form, i. e.,
in the form which serves as the direct expression of the circulation of
commodities.

The process  consists of the movement , the exchange of the
commodity for money, or _selling_; the opposite movement , exchange
of money for a commodity, or _buying_; and of the unity of the two
movements , exchange of the commodity for money in order to
exchange the money for a commodity, or _selling_ in order to _buy_.
But the result which marks the end of the process is C―C, exchange of
commodity for commodity, real interchange of matter.

If we look at it from the extreme end of the first commodity, 
represents its transformation into gold and its retransformation from
gold into a commodity; a movement in which the commodity exists first
as a particular use-value, then divests itself of that character,
acquires the character of exchange value or universal equivalent,
in which capacity it has nothing in common with its natural form,
then throws off the last form as well to remain finally an actual
use-value for the satisfaction of particular wants. In this last form
it falls out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption.
The entire process of circulation  thus includes the combined
series of metamorphoses, which every single commodity undergoes
in order to become a direct use-value to its possessor. The first
metamorphosis is accomplished in the first phase of the circulation
process, ; the second in the last phase, ; and the entire
process constitutes the _curriculum vitae_ of the commodity. But
the process  represents the combined metamorphosis of a single
commodity and constitutes at the same time the sum of certain one-sided
metamorphoses of other commodities, since every metamorphosis of the
first commodity constitutes its transformation into another commodity
and therefore the transformation of the other commodity into it; hence
it constitutes a twofold transformation which takes place at the same
stage of circulation. We must then consider separately each of the two
processes of exchange into which circulation  breaks up.

 or _sale_: commodity C enters the process of circulation not only
as a particular use-value, e. g., a ton of iron, but as a use-value
of a certain price, say, £3 17s. 10-1/2d., or an ounce of gold.
While this price is on the one hand the exponent of the quantity of
labor-time contained in a ton of iron, i. e., of the magnitude of its
value, it at the same time expresses the pious wish of the iron to
become gold, i. e., to give to the labor-time it contains the aspect
of universal social labor-time. Unless this trans-substantiation takes
place, the ton of iron not only ceases to be a commodity, but even a
product, for it is a commodity only because it is a non-use-value to
its owner; that is to say, his labor counts as actual labor only in so
far as it is labor useful to others, and the thing is useful to him
only as abstract universal labor. It is, therefore, the business of
iron, or of its owner, to find that point in the world of commodities
where iron attracts gold. But this difficulty, the _salto mortale_
of the commodity, is overcome when the sale actually takes place, as
is assumed here on the analysis of simple circulation. When the ton
of iron is realized as a use-value through its alienation, i. e., by
passing from the hands in which it is a non-use-value to hands in which
it is a use-value, it at the same time realizes its price and from mere
imaginary gold it becomes real gold. In place of the name one ounce of
gold or £3 17s. 10-1/2d., an ounce of real gold has appeared, but the
ton of iron has cleared that place. Not only does the commodity―which
in its price had been ideally converted into gold―actually turn into
gold through the sale , but gold, which as a measure of value had
been only ideal money and in fact figured merely as a money name of
commodities―is now turned into actual money[66] by the same process.
Just as gold became the ideal universal equivalent, because all
commodities measured their values by it, so does it now become the
absolutely alienable commodity, real money, because it is the product
of the universal alienation of commodities for it―and the sale  is
the process by means of which that universal alienation takes place.
But gold becomes real money only through sale, because the exchange
values of commodities were already ideal gold in their prices.

In the sale , as well as in the purchase , two commodities,
entities of exchange value and use-value, confront each other, but the
exchange value of the commodity exists only ideally as price; while
as regards gold, although it is really a use-value, its use-value
is confined only to its being the bearer of exchange value and is,
therefore, merely a formal use-value, having no relation to a real
individual want. The antithesis of use-value and exchange value is thus
distributed at the two extreme poles of , so that the commodity
confronts gold as a use-value which has yet to realize in gold its
exchange value or its price, while gold confronts the commodity as an
exchange value, whose formal use-value is yet to be realized in the
commodity. Only through this duplication of the commodity as commodity
and gold, and, further, through the twofold and polar relation by
virtue of which each extreme represents but ideally what its opposite
is in reality and is in reality what its opposite is only ideally―in
short, only through the appearance of commodities as two-sided polar
opposites are the contradictions solved that are inherent in the
process of exchange.

So far we have considered  as sale, as the conversion of commodity
into money. But if we look at it from the other end, the same process
will assume the form , or purchase, i. e., the conversion of
money into commodity. Sale is necessarily its opposite at the same
time; it is the former if we look at the process from one end, and
the latter if we regard the process from the other end. In practice
this process differs only in that the initiative in  originates
at the commodity end or with the seller, while in  it comes from
the money end or the buyer. In describing the first metamorphosis
of the commodity, its conversion into money as a result of the
completion of the first phase of circulation , we assume at the
same time that another commodity has been converted into money and
is now in its second phase of circulation, . Thus we get into a
vicious circle of assumptions. Circulation itself constitutes such a
vicious circle. If we did not consider M in  as the result of a
metamorphosis of another commodity, we would thereby take exchange out
of the process of circulation. But outside of the latter the form 
disappears and only two different Cs confront each other, say iron
and gold, the exchange of which does not constitute a part of the
process of circulation, being direct barter. Gold, at the source of
its production, is a commodity like any other commodity. Its relative
value and that of iron or of any other commodity is expressed here in
quantities in which they are mutually exchanged. But in the process
of circulation this operation is implied, the value of gold being
already given in the prices of commodities. Nothing can, therefore,
be more erroneous than the idea that gold and commodity enter into
the relation of direct barter _within the process of circulation_ and
that their relative values are ascertained through their exchange as
simple commodities. The illusion that gold is bartered as a simple
commodity for other commodities in the process of circulation is due to
the fact that prices represent equations in which certain quantities
of commodities are made equal to certain quantities of gold, i. e.,
that the commodities are made to relate to gold in its capacity
of money, as a universal equivalent, and, therefore, appear to be
directly exchangeable for it. In so far as the price of a commodity
is _realized_ in gold, it is exchanged for gold as a commodity, as a
particular embodiment of labor-time; but in so far as it is the _price_
that is realized in gold, the commodity is exchanged for gold in its
capacity of money and not of a commodity, i. e., it is exchanged for
gold as a universal embodiment of labor-time. But in either case the
quantity of gold for which the commodity is exchanged in the process
of circulation is not determined by exchange, but the exchange is
determined by the price of the commodity, i. e., by its exchange value
estimated in gold.[67]

Within the process of circulation gold appears in everybody’s hands as
the result of sale . But since , sale, is at the same time ,
purchase, it is apparent that while C, the commodity from which the
process starts, is passing through its first metamorphosis, another
commodity, which confronts it as the opposite pole M, is completing
its second metamorphosis and is, therefore, passing through the second
phase of circulation, while the first commodity is still in the first
phase of its course.

As a result of the first phase of circulation, the sale, we get
money which is the starting point of the second phase. In place of
the commodity in its first form appears its golden equivalent. This
result may now form a resting point, since the commodity in this
second form possesses a lasting existence of its own. The commodity,
a non-use-value in the hands of its possessor, is now on hand in an
always useful, since always exchangeable, form, and it depends upon
circumstances when and at what point of the surface of the commodity
world it will again enter circulation. Its formation into a gold
chrysalis constitutes an independent period in its life which may last
a greater or less length of time. While in the case of barter the
exchange of one particular use-value is directly bound up with the
exchange of another particular use-value, the universal character of
labor which creates exchange value is manifested in the separation and
lack of coincidence of acts of purchase and sale.

_, purchase_, is the inverted movement of  and at the same time
the second or final metamorphosis of the commodity. As gold, i. e., in
the form of the universal equivalent, the commodity can be directly
represented in the use-values of all other commodities; the latter
aspire to gold as their hereafter, but at the same time indicate in
their prices the key in which it must sound in order that their bodies,
their use-values, may take the place of money, while their souls,
their exchange-values, may enter gold. The universal product of the
alienation of commodities is the absolutely alienable commodity. There
is no qualitative and only a quantitative limit to the transformation
of gold into commodity, namely, the limit of its own quantity or
magnitude of its value. “Everything is to be had for cash.” While in
the movement , the commodity, through its alienation as a use-value,
realizes its own price and the use-value of somebody else’s money; it
realizes in the movement , through its alienation as an exchange
value, its own use-value and the price of the other commodity. While
through the realization of its price the commodity transforms gold
into actual money, it turns gold into its merely fleeting money-form,
through its own retransformation. Since the circulation of commodities
implies an extensive division of labor and consequently a diversity of
wants on the part of individuals, a diversity which bears an inverse
ratio to the specialization of their own products, the purchase  may
appear as an equation with one commodity equivalent or split up into a
series of commodity-equivalents limited by the variety of the demands
of the purchaser and by the amount of money in his possession. Just as
a sale is a purchase, so is a purchase a sale.  is at the same time
, but the initiative belongs in this case to gold or the purchaser.

Coming back now to , or to circulation as a whole, it is apparent
that it contains the combined series of metamorphoses through which
a commodity passes. But at the same time as one commodity enters the
first phase of its circulation and completes its first metamorphosis,
another commodity enters the second phase of circulation, completes its
second metamorphosis and falls out of circulation; the first commodity
enters at the same time the second phase of circulation completes
its second metamorphosis and falls out of circulation, while a third
commodity enters circulation, passes through the first phase of its
course completing the first metamorphosis.

Thus, the combined circulation , as a complete metamorphosis of a
commodity always constitutes at the same time the end of the complete
metamorphosis of another commodity and the beginning of a complete
metamorphosis of a third commodity, i. e., a series without beginning
or end. To illustrate this let us call C in either extreme C’ and C”
respectively, in order to distinguish the commodities, the series
reading thus: C’―”. The first member, C’―M, presupposes in fact
that M is the result of another transaction , and is thus itself
merely the last member of a series ’, while the second part ”
is merely a result of C”―M, or appears as the first part of C”―’”,
and so on. Furthermore, although M is the result of only _one_ sale,
it appears that the last part , may be represented as ’ + ”
+ ’”, etc., i. e., it may be split up into a number of purchases,
and consequently a number of sales, or into a number of first members
of new complete metamorphoses of commodities. Since the complete
metamorphosis of a single commodity thus appears as a link not only
of one endless chain of metamorphoses, but of many such chains, the
process of circulation in the world of commodities presents a hopeless
confusion of intertwined movements constantly ending and starting anew
at a countless number of points. But every single sale or purchase
stands as an independent isolated act, whose supplemental act may be
separated from it in time and place, and therefore does not need to
follow it directly as its continuation. Every separate process of
circulation,  or , as a transformation of one commodity into
use-value and of another into money, i. e., as the first and second
phases of circulation respectively forms an independent halting
point from either direction; but, on the other hand, all commodities
commence their second metamorphosis in the common form of the universal
equivalent, gold, and stop at the starting point of the second phase of
circulation; for that, reason any  dovetails in actual circulation
with any ; the second chapter in the life-course of one commodity
with the first chapter of that of another commodity. A, e. g., sells
£2 worth of iron. He thus completes the transaction  or the first
metamorphosis of commodity iron, but postpones his purchase until some
other time. At the same time B, who sold 2 quarters of wheat for £6 a
fortnight since, buys with the same £6 a coat and trousers of Moses &
Son, thus completing  or the second metamorphosis of the commodity,
wheat.

The two transactions  and  appear here merely as links of one
chain, because a commodity expressed in gold looks like any other
commodity, and one cannot tell by the looks of the gold whether it is
transformed iron or transformed wheat.  appears, therefore, in the
actual process of circulation as a jumble of countless accidentally
coinciding or successively following members of different complete
metamorphoses. The actual process of circulation thus appears not as
a complete metamorphosis of a commodity, not as its movement through
opposite phases, but as a mere agglomeration of many accidentally
coinciding or successive purchases and sales. The process thus loses
all clearness of outline which is so much more the case since every
single act of circulation, e. g., sale, is at the same time its
opposite, purchase, and vice versa. On the other hand, the process
of circulation is nothing but the movement of metamorphoses in the
world of commodities and, therefore, must reflect them also in its
movement as a whole. How that reflection takes place we shall consider
in the following chapter. It may be added here that in  the two
extreme Cs constitute two forms of commodities which do not bear the
same relation to M. The first C relates to money as a commodity of a
special class to a universal commodity, while money relates to the
second C as a universal commodity to an individual commodity. 
can, therefore, be reduced by abstract logic to the final form S―U―I in
which S, standing for species, forms the first extreme; U, signifying
universality, forms the connecting medium, and I, individuality,
constitutes the last extreme.

The owners of commodities entered the sphere of circulation simply
as guardians of commodities. Within that sphere they confront each
other in the opposite roles of buyer and seller, one as a personified
sugar-loaf, the other as personified gold. As soon as the sugar-loaf
is turned into gold, the seller becomes a buyer. These definite social
functions are no outgrowths of human nature, but are the products
of relations of exchange between men who produce their goods in the
form of commodities. They are so far from being purely individual
relations between buyer and seller that both enter this relation
only to the extent that their individual labor is disregarded and
is turned into money as labor of _no_ individual. Just as it is,
therefore, childish to consider these economic bourgeois roles of
buyer and seller as eternal social forms of human individuality, so it
is on the other hand, preposterous to lament in them the extinction
of individuality.[68] They are the necessary manifestations of
individuality at a certain stage of the social system of production.
Moreover, in the opposition of buyer and seller the antagonistic nature
of capitalistic production is expressed as yet so superficially
and as mere matter of form, that this opposition belongs also to
precapitalistic forms of society, since it merely requires that
the mutual relations of individuals should be those of owners of
commodities.

Now, if we consider the result of , it comes down to mere
interchange of matter, C―C. A commodity has been exchanged for a
commodity, a use-value for a use-value, and the transformation of the
commodity into money, or the commodity in its form of money, serves
merely as a means of effecting this interchange of matter. Money thus
appears merely as a _medium of exchange_ of commodities; not as a
medium of exchange in general, but as a means of exchange in the sphere
of circulation, i. e., a _medium of circulation_.[69]

We have seen that the process of circulation of commodities comes to
a completion in C―C, appearing as mere barter carried on by means of
money; further, that  represents in general not only two isolated
processes, but their dynamic union as well; but to draw from that the
conclusion that purchase and sale form an indivisible unit, is a mode
of thinking the criticism of which belongs to the domain of logic,
and not to that of economics. The separation of purchase and sale in
the process of exchange destroys all local, primitive, patriarchal
and naively genial barriers to interchange of matter in society. It
is, moreover, the general form of the separation of the points of
coincidence and opposition in this interchange, carrying within it the
possibility of commercial crises, because the antagonism of commodity
and money is the abstract and general form of all antagonisms with
which the capitalistic system of labor is pregnant. Hence, circulation
of money is possible without crises, but crises can not occur without
money circulation. In other words, where labor based on the system of
private exchange has not reached the stage marked by the existence
of money, it is less capable of producing those phenomena which
presuppose the full development of the capitalistic mode of production.
Bearing this in mind we can appreciate the depth of the criticism
which proposes to do away with the “shortcomings” of capitalistic
production by abolishing the “privilege” enjoyed by the precious metals
and introducing a so-called “rational monetary system.” As a sample
of economic defence of an opposite character may serve the following
piece of reasoning which has been proclaimed exceedingly keen. JAMES
MILL, the father of the well-known English economist, John Stuart Mill,
says: “Whatever ... be the amount of the annual produce, it never can
exceed the amount of the annual demand.... Of two men who perform an
exchange, the one does not come with only a supply, the other with only
a demand; each of them comes with both a demand and a supply.... The
supply which he brings is the instrument of his demand; and his demand
and supply are of course exactly equal to one another. It is therefore,
impossible that there should ever be in any country a commodity or
commodities in quantity greater than the demand, without there being,
to an equal amount, some other commodity or commodities in quantity
less than the demand.”[70]

Mill restores the balance by turning the process of circulation into
direct barter and then smuggling into direct barter the character of
buyer and seller borrowed by him from the process of circulation. To
put it in his own confused language, during certain periods when all
commodities are unsaleable there are really more buyers than sellers
of one commodity, _money_, and more sellers than buyers of _all other
money_, commodities; such was, e. g., the case at certain moments
during the commercial crisis of 1857-58 in London and Hamburg. The
metaphysical balance of purchases and sales amounts to this, that
every purchase is a sale and every sale is a purchase, which is a poor
consolation to the guardian of the commodity who can not bring about
its sale and therefore can not buy.[71]

The separation of sale and purchase makes possible a large number of
fictitious transactions side by side with genuine trade before the
final exchange between the producer and the consumer of commodities
takes place. It enables a host of parasites to penetrate the process of
production and exploit the separation. But this, again, means that with
money as the universal form of labor under the capitalist system, there
is _the possibility_ of the development of its contradictions.


Actual circulation appears at first sight as a mass of purchases and
sales accidentally taking place side by side. In buying as in selling,
commodities and money always stand in the same mutual relation: the
seller, on the side of the commodity; the buyer, on that of money.
Money as a medium of circulation always appears therefore as _a means
of purchase_; and in that way the difference in its destinations in
the opposite phases of the metamorphosis of the commodity becomes
indistinguishable.

Money passes into the hands of the seller in the same transaction in
which the commodity passes into the hands of the buyer. Commodities
and money thus flow in opposite directions and this change of place
in which the commodity passes over to one side and money to the other
side, occurs simultaneously at an indefinitely large number of points
on the entire surface of bourgeois society. But the first step which
the commodity makes in the sphere of circulation is also its last
step.[72] Whether it leaves its place on account of its attraction
for gold (), or on account of its attraction by gold (), with
one move, with one change of place it falls out of the sphere of
circulation into that of consumption. Circulation is a continuous flow
of commodities, but different commodities all the time, since each
commodity makes but one move. Every commodity enters upon the second
phase of its circulation not as the same commodity, but as another
commodity, gold. Hence the movement of a metamorphosed commodity is the
movement of gold. The same piece of gold or the identical gold coin
which changed places with one commodity in the act , reappears from
the opposite end as the starting point for  and thus changes places
for the second time with another commodity. Just as it passed from the
hands of buyer B into those of seller A, it now leaves A’s hands who
has become a buyer and passes into C’s hands. The path described by a
commodity in its transformation into money and its retransformation
from money, i. e., the movement of a complete metamorphosis of a
commodity assumes the aspect of an apparent movement of the same coin
that changes places twice with two different commodities. No matter in
how scattered and haphazard fashion purchases and sales may take place
near each other, there is always in actual circulation a seller for
each buyer and the money which moves into the place of the commodity
sold, before it came into the hands of the buyer, must have already
changed places with another commodity. Sooner or later it again leaves
the hands of the seller, who turns buyer, to pass into the hands of
a new seller and this frequently repeated change of place forms the
interlacing of the metamorphoses of commodities. The same coins are
moving, some more, others less frequently, from one place in the
sphere of circulation to another, always in the direction opposite to
that of the commodities moved, thus describing a longer or shorter
circulation-curve. The different movements of the same coin can follow
each other in point of time only, and on the contrary, the many
scattered purchases and sales which appear as so many separate changes
of place between commodities and money, occur simultaneously separated
only in point of space.

The circulation of commodities  in its elementary form is
completely described in the transition of money from the hands of the
buyer into those of the seller and from the hands of the latter, as
soon as he has turned buyer, into those of a new seller. This completes
the metamorphosis of the commodity and with it the movement of money
in so far as that movement is the expression of the metamorphosis.
But since new use-values are continually produced in the shape of new
commodities and must thus be constantly thrown anew into circulation,
the process  is repeatedly renewed by the same commodity owners.
The money which they have spent as buyers gets back into their hands
as soon as they appear again as vendors of commodities. The constant
renewal of the circulation of commodities finds its reflection in the
continual circulation over the entire surface of bourgeois society of
a quantity of money which, passing from hand to hand, describes at the
same time a number of different small cycles starting from numberless
points and returning each to its own starting point, to repeat the same
movement over again.

The change of form on the part of commodities appears as a mere change
of place on the part of money and the continuity of the circulation
movement is all on the side of money, since the commodity always makes
but one step in the direction opposite to money, while the latter makes
in each case the second step for the commodity; the entire movement
seems, therefore, to proceed from money, although in the case of a sale
the commodity draws money out of its place, i. e., it circulates money
as much as it is circulated by the latter in the case of a purchase.
Furthermore, owing to the fact that money always confronts commodities
in its capacity of a means of purchase, and in that capacity moves
commodities only by realizing their price, the entire movement of
circulation appears as a change of place between money and commodities,
the former realizing the prices of the latter either by separate acts
of circulation taking place simultaneously and side by side, or by
successive transactions when the same coin realizes the prices of
different commodities one after another. If we consider, e. g., the
series ’―”―’”, etc., without regard to the qualitative
aspects which become indistinguishable in the process of circulation,
we witness the same monotonous operation. After realizing the price
of C, M successively realizes those of C’, C”, etc., and commodities
C’, C”, C’”, etc., constantly take the place which money has left.
Money thus appears to keep commodities in circulation by realizing
their prices. In discharging this function of realization of prices,
money is itself constantly circulating, now changing its place, now
describing a curve of circulation, now completing a small circuit where
the starting and returning points coincide. As a medium of circulation,
money is subject to a circulation of its own. The change of form of
the circulating commodities appears, therefore, as a movement of money
which furthers the exchange of commodities, motionless in themselves.
The movement of the circulation process of commodities thus takes on
the form of the movement of gold as a medium of circulation, i. e. of
the _circulation of money_.

Since owners of commodities give the products of their individual labor
the appearance of products of social labor by turning one object,
viz. gold, into the direct expression of universal labor-time and
therefore into money, their own movement by which all of them effect
the interchange of the material products of their labor now appears to
them as the direct movement of that one object, as the circulation of
gold. The social movement itself appears to the owners of commodities
partly as an outward necessity and partly as a mere formal intermediary
process which enables every individual who puts any use-value into
circulation to get other use-values out of it of an equal value. The
use-value of commodities comes into play with their disappearance from
the sphere or circulation, while the use-value of money as a medium of
circulation is in its very circulation. The movement of a commodity
in the sphere of circulation is of a transitory kind, while ceaseless
motion in that sphere constitutes the function of money. Through this
special function which it performs within the sphere of circulation
money acquires a new capacity, which we have to consider now more
closely.

In the first place, we see that the circulation of money forms an
endlessly split up movement, since it reflects the splitting up of the
process of circulation into an infinitely large number of purchases
and sales and the independent separation of the mutually supplementary
phases of metamorphoses of commodities. In the small cycles described
by money, where the starting and returning points coincide, we do find
a return movement, i. e., an actual circular movement, but the fact
that there are as many starting points as there are commodities and
that the number of these cycles is infinitely large puts them beyond
all control, measurement, or computation. The time between the start
and the return of a commodity is just as indefinite. Moreover, it is
immaterial whether or not such a circuit has been actually described in
a given case. No economic fact is more generally known than that one
can spend money with one hand without getting it back with the other.
Money proceeds from an endless number of points and returns to as many
different points, but the coincidence of the starting and returning
points is a matter of chance, because in the movement  the turning
of the buyer again into a seller is not a necessary condition. Still
less does the circulation of money resemble a movement radiating
from a common centre to all points of the periphery and back from
the peripheral points to the centre. The so-called cycle described
by money, as it is pictured, amounts simply to this, that at all
points we observe its appearance and disappearance, its never ceasing
transition from place to place. In a higher, more involved form of
money circulation, e. g. bank-note circulation, we shall find that
the conditions of emission of money include those for its return. But
in the simple money circulation it is a matter of chance for the same
buyer to become again a seller. Where we really see constant cycle
motions taking place, they are only reflections of deeper forces in
the sphere of production, e. g., the manufacturer draws money from his
banker on Friday, pays it out to his working-men on Saturday, the men
immediately pay out the greater part of it to the storekeepers, etc.,
and the latter turn it in on Monday back to the banker.

We have seen that money realizes simultaneously a certain number of
prices in the variegated purchases and sales which take place side by
side at the same time. On the other hand, in so far as its movement
represents the movement of the combined metamorphoses of commodities
and the interlacing of these metamorphoses, the same coin realizes
the prices of different commodities and thus makes a larger or
smaller number of moves. If we take the circulation of a country for
a given length of time, say a day, the quantity of gold required for
the realization of prices and, consequently, for the circulation of
commodities, will be determined by two conditions: first, the sum
total of the prices; second, the average number of moves made by one
coin. This number of moves or the rapidity of circulation of money is
in its turn determined by or expresses the average rapidity with which
commodities go through the different phases of their metamorphoses, the
rapidity with which these metamorphoses succeed one another, and with
which those commodities that have gone through their metamorphoses are
replaced by new commodities in the process of circulation. We have seen
that in the process of the determination of prices the exchange value
of all commodities is ideally converted into a certain quantity of gold
of the same value and that the same amount of value is present in a
double form in either of the isolated acts of circulation  and ,
first embodied in the commodity, and second, in gold; yet gold enjoys
the capacity of a medium of circulation not by virtue of its isolated
relation to separate commodities in a state of rest, but owing to its
active presence in the dynamic world of commodities, viz., its function
of expressing the change of form of commodities by its change of place
and expressing the rapidity of their change of form by the rapidity of
its change of place. The extent to which it is present in the sphere
of circulation, i. e., the actual quantity of gold in circulation, is
thus determined by the extent to which it is discharging its function
throughout the entire process.

The circulation of money implies the circulation of commodities; money
circulates commodities which have prices, i. e., which are beforehand
ideally equated to certain quantities of gold. In the determination
of the prices of commodities, the value of the quantity of gold
which serves as a unit of measure, or the value of gold, is assumed
to be given. Under that assumption the quantity of gold necessary
for circulation is determined first of all by the sum total of the
prices of commodities that are to be realized. But this sum is itself
determined: 1. By the level of prices, the relatively high or low
exchange value of commodities estimated in gold; and 2. By the mass
of commodities circulating at fixed prices, i. e. by the number of
purchases and sales at given prices.[73] If one quarter of wheat is
worth 60 shillings, then twice as much gold is required to circulate it
or to realize its price as would be the case if it were worth only 30
shillings. To circulate 500 quarters of wheat at 60 shillings, twice
as much gold is necessary as for the circulation of 250 quarters at
the same price. Finally, to circulate 10 quarters at 100 shillings
only half as much money is necessary as when circulating 40 quarters
at 50 shillings. It follows that the quantity of gold required for
circulation may fall in spite of a rise in price, if the mass of
commodities in circulation declines in a greater ratio than the
rise of the combined sum of prices; and, inversely, the quantity of
the circulating medium may rise in spite of a decline of the mass
of commodities in circulation, if the sum total of prices rises in
a greater ratio. Thorough and minute English investigations have
demonstrated e. g. that in the early stages of a dearth of grain in
England the quantity of money in circulation increases, because the
total price of the diminished supply of grain is greater than the
former total price of a larger supply of grain, while the circulation
of the other commodities continues undisturbed for some time at their
old prices. At a later stage of the dearth of grain, there is a decline
in the quantity of circulating money, either because less goods are
sold at old prices besides grain, or the same quantity of those goods
is sold at lower prices.

But, as we have seen, the quantity of money in circulation is
determined not only by the sum total of prices of commodities that are
to be realized, but also by the rapidity with which money circulates
or with which it completes this work of realization. If the same
sovereign makes ten purchases a day, each of a commodity having a
price of one sovereign, and thus changes hands ten times, it does as
much work as would be accomplished by ten sovereigns each performing
but a single act of circulation a day.[74] Consequently, rapidity of
gold circulation can make up for its quantity, or the presence of gold
in the sphere of circulation is determined not only by its presence
as an equivalent of a commodity side by side with it, but also by
its participation in the movement of metamorphoses of commodities.
The rapidity of the circulation of money, however, can serve as a
substitute for its quantity only to a limited extent, since at any
given moment an endless number of isolated purchases and sales takes
places in different localities.

If the total price of the commodities in circulation rises, but in
a smaller ratio than the increase in the rapidity of circulation of
money, the volume of the circulating medium will diminish. If on the
contrary the rapidity of circulation decreases in a greater ratio
than the total price of the commodities in circulation, the volume
of currency will increase. An increasing volume of currency combined
with a general fall of prices or a diminishing volume of currency in
connection with a general rise of prices is one of the best known
phenomena in the history of prices. But the consideration of the
causes which bring about a simultaneous rise in the level of prices
and a still greater rise in the rate of velocity of circulation of
money, or the opposite phenomenon, falls outside of the sphere of
simple circulation. By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that
in periods of prevailing credit, the rapidity of circulation of
money grows faster than the prices of commodities, while in times
of declining credit the prices of commodities fall slower than the
rapidity of circulation. The shallow and artificial character of the
simple circulation of money is manifested in the fact that all the
elements which have a determining influence on the volume of currency,
such as the volume of commodities in circulation, prices, the rise or
fall of prices, the number of simultaneous purchases and sales, the
rapidity of the circulation of money,―depend on the metamorphic process
which takes place in the world of commodities, and that again depends
on the general character of the methods of production, the size of
population, the relation between city and country, the development of
the means of transportation, the greater or less division of labor,
credit, etc.; in short, on circumstances all of which lie _outside_ of
the sphere of simple circulation of money and are only reflected in it.

The rapidity of circulation being given, the volume of currency is
simply determined by the prices of commodities. Hence, prices are not
high or low, because there is more or less money in circulation, but
on the contrary, there is more or less money in circulation, because
prices are high or low. This is one of the most important laws, whose
demonstration in detail by means of the history of prices constitutes
perhaps the only merit of the post-Ricardian English Political Economy.
If experience shows, that the level of metallic circulation or the mass
of gold and silver in circulation in a given country is subject to
temporary ebbs and tides and very violent ones at times,[75] but on
the whole remains stationary for long periods, the deviations forming
but small oscillations about the average level, this is explained
by the antagonistic nature of the circumstances which determine the
quantity of money in circulation. Their simultaneous modifications
neutralize their effects and leave everything where it was before.

The law, that with a given rapidity of circulation of money and a given
total sum of prices of commodities the quantity of the circulating
medium is determined, may also be expressed as follows. If the exchange
values of commodities and the average rapidity of their metamorphoses
are given, the quantity of gold in circulation depends on its own
value. If, therefore, the value of gold, i. e. the labor-time necessary
for its production, should rise or fall, the prices of commodities will
rise or fall in inverse ratio, and corresponding to that rise or fall
of prices, the rapidity of circulation remaining the same, a larger or
smaller quantity of gold would be required to keep the same volume of
commodities in circulation. The same change would occur, if the old
standard of value were superseded by a more or less valuable metal.
Thus, Holland required from fourteen to fifteen times as much silver as
it had previously required gold, in order to circulate the same volume
of commodities, when out of tender regard for the government creditors
and out of fear of the effects of the discoveries in California and
Australia it substituted silver for gold money.

From the fact that the quantity of gold in circulation depends on the
variable sum total of prices of commodities and the varying rapidity
of circulation, it follows that the volume of the circulating medium
must be capable of contraction and expansion; in short, that according
to the requirements of circulation, gold must now enter, now leave the
sphere of circulation in its capacity of a medium of circulation. How
the circulation process itself realizes these conditions, we shall see
later on.


In its capacity of a medium of circulation, gold acquires a shape
of its own, it becomes _coin_. In order to prevent any technical
difficulties in the way of its circulation, it is coined according to
the standard of the money of account. Gold pieces whose imprints and
legends show that they contain certain weights of gold corresponding
to the reckoning names of money, £, s., etc., are coins. The
establishment of a mint-price, as well as the technical work of
coining, are the business of the state. Both as money of account and
as coin, money acquires a _local and political character_; it speaks
different languages and wears different national uniforms. The sphere
in which money circulates as coin, is distinguished as an _internal_
sphere of circulation which is separated from the _universal_ sphere of
circulation in the commodity world by national boundaries.

Yet, the only difference between gold bullion and gold coin is that
between coin denomination and weight denomination. What seems to be a
difference in name in the latter case appears as a difference in shape
in the former. Gold coin can be thrown into the melting-pot and thus be
converted again into gold _sans phrase_, just as, on the contrary, gold
bars only have to be sent to the mint to receive the shape of coins.
The conversion and reconversion from one form into another appears to
be a purely technical matter.

For 100 pounds or 1200 ounces troy of 22 carat gold one can get
£4,672-1/2 or gold sovereigns at the English mint; if these sovereigns
be put on one side of the weighing scale and one hundred pounds of
gold bullion on the other, the two will balance each other, which
proves that the sovereign is nothing but a piece of gold of certain
weight bearing this name in English coinage and having a shape and
stamp of its own. The 4,672-1/2 sovereigns are put into circulation
at different points, and once in its grasp they make a certain number
of moves per day, some sovereigns more, others less. If the average
number of moves per day of each ounce be ten, the 1200 ounces of gold
would realize 12,000 ounces or 46,725 sovereigns as the total price
of commodities. You may turn and toss an ounce of gold in any way you
like, and it will never weigh ten ounces. But here in the process of
circulation one ounce practically does weigh ten ounces. The work
performed by a coin in the sphere of circulation is equivalent to the
quantity of gold it contains multiplied by the number of its moves.
Besides the actual importance which a coin possesses by virtue of its
being an individual piece of gold of a definite weight, it acquires
an ideal significance due to its function. But whether the sovereign
circulates once or ten times, in each particular purchase or sale
it acts only as one sovereign. It is like a general who by timely
appearance at ten different points on the battle field does the work
of ten generals, but still remains the same identical general at each
point. The idealization of the means of circulation which is due to the
supplanting of quantity by rapidity in money circulation, affects only
the function of the coin within the sphere of circulation, but not the
nature of the individual coin.

The circulation of money is a movement through the outside world, and
the sovereign, though it _non olet_, keeps rather mixed company. In the
course of its friction against all kinds of hands, pouches, pockets,
purses, money-belts, bags, chests and strong-boxes, the coin rubs off,
loses one gold atom here and another one there and thus, as it wears
off in its wanderings over the world, it loses more and more of its
intrinsic substance. By being used it gets used up. Let us take up a
sovereign at the moment when its natural, inborn character has been
slightly affected. A baker, says Dodd,[76] who receives from the bank
to-day a brand new sovereign and pays it tomorrow to the miller,
does not pay the same veritable sovereign; the latter has become
lighter than it was at the time he received it. It is clear, says an
anonymous writer,[77] that in the very nature of things, coins must
depreciate one by one as a result of ordinary and unavoidable friction.
It is a physical impossibility to entirely exclude light coins from
circulation at any time, even for one day. Jacob estimates that of
the 380 million pounds sterling which were in existence in Europe in
1809, nineteen million pounds sterling entirely disappeared by 1829,
i. e., within a period of twenty years.[78] Thus, while a commodity
at its first step into the sphere of circulation, falls out of it, a
coin, after a couple of steps within that sphere represents more metal
than it actually contains. The longer a coin remains in circulation,
the rapidity of circulation remaining the same, or the greater its
rapidity of circulation within the same period of time, the greater
the discrepancy between its form as coin and its actual gold or silver
substance. What remains is _magni nominis umbra_. The body of the coin
becomes but a shadow. If at first it became heavier through the process
of circulation, it now becomes lighter on account of it, but continues
to represent the original quantity of gold in each single purchase or
sale. The sovereign, as a fictitious sovereign, as fictitious gold,
continues to perform the function of a legitimate coin. While other
beings lose their idealism in contact with the outer world, the coin is
idealized by practice, being gradually transformed into a mere phantom
of its golden or silver body. This second idealization of metal money
springing from the very process of circulation, or from the discrepancy
between its nominal weight and its real weight is exploited in all
kinds of coin counterfeiting practiced partly by governments, partly by
private adventurers. The entire history of coinage from the beginning
of the middle ages until late in the eighteenth century is nothing
but a history of these twofold and antagonistic adulterations, and
Custodi’s voluminous collection of writings of Italian economists turns
mostly about this point.

But the fictitious importance of gold due to its function, comes
in conflict with its real substance. One gold coin has lost more,
another, less of its metal substance in the course of circulation,
and one of them is, as a matter of fact, worth more now than the
other. But since in the discharge of their function of coins they
are taken at the same value, the sovereign weighing a quarter of an
ounce passing for no more than the sovereign which only stands for a
quarter of an ounce, the full-weight sovereigns are subjected in the
hands of unscrupulous owners to surgical operations which produce
artificially what the circulation process has caused in a natural way
to their more light-weighted brothers. They are clipped and reduced
and the superfluous gold fat lands in the melting pot. If 4,672-1/2
gold sovereigns when put on one side of the weighing scale weigh on an
average only 800 ounces instead of 1200, they will buy when brought
to the gold market only 800 ounces of gold; that is, the market price
of gold would rise above its mint price. Every coin, even if of full
weight would pass in its mint form for less than in bullion form. The
full weight sovereigns would be reconverted into bullion, a form in
which a greater quantity of gold is always worth more than a smaller
quantity. As soon as this decline of metallic weight would affect a
sufficiently large number of sovereigns to bring about a permanent
rise of the market price of gold above its mint price, the reckoning
names of the coins, though remaining the same, would begin to denote a
smaller quantity of gold. That is to say, the standard of money would
change and gold would be coined in the future according to this new
standard. By virtue of its idealization as a medium of circulation,
gold would react upon and change the legally determined ratios under
which it acted as the standard of price. The same revolution would
be repeated after a certain length of time and thus gold would be
subject to constant change both as a standard of price and as a
medium of circulation, a change under one of these forms leading to a
change under the other and vice versa. This explains the phenomenon
mentioned above, namely that in the history of all modern nations
the same money-name stands for a constantly diminishing quantity of
metal. The contradiction between gold as coin and gold as standard of
price becomes also one between gold as coin and gold as the universal
equivalent; in the latter capacity it circulates not only within the
limits of national boundaries, but in the world market. As a measure of
value gold was always of full weight, because it served only as ideal
gold. In its capacity of equivalent in the isolated transaction  it
passes at once from a state of motion to a state of rest; but in its
capacity of coin its natural substance comes in constant conflict with
its function. The transformation of the gold sovereign into fictitious
gold can not be wholly avoided, but legislation seeks to prevent its
unlimited circulation as coin by prescribing its withdrawal from
circulation as soon as its shortage of metallic substance reaches a
certain degree. According to the English law, e. g., a sovereign which
lacks more than 0.747 grains of its weight ceases to be legal tender.
The Bank of England which weighed forty-eight million gold sovereigns
in the short period between 1844 and 1848, possesses in Mr. Cotton’s
gold weighing scale a machine which not only detects a difference of
1-100 part of a grain between two sovereigns, but like a sensible
being, immediately throws out the light-weight coin on a board where
it lands under another machine which cuts it up with oriental cruelty.

That being the case, gold coins could not circulate at all were not
their circulation confined to definite spheres in which they do not
wear off so rapidly. In so far as a gold coin weighing only one-fifth
of an ounce passes in circulation for a quarter of an ounce of gold,
it is practically merely a sign or a symbol for one-twentieth of an
ounce of gold, and in that way all gold coins are transformed by the
very process of circulation into more or less of a mere sign or symbol
of their substance. But no thing can be its own symbol. Painted grapes
are no symbol of real grapes, they are imaginary grapes. Still less can
a light-weight sovereign be a symbol of a full-weighted one, just as
a lean horse can not serve as a symbol of a fat one. Since gold thus
becomes a symbol of its own self, but at the same time can not serve in
that capacity, it receives a symbolical, silver or copper substitute in
those spheres of circulation in which it is most subject to wear and
tear, namely where purchases and sales are constantly taking place on
the smallest scale. In these spheres, even if not the same identical
coins, still a certain part of the entire supply of gold money would
constantly circulate as coin. To that extent gold is substituted by
silver or copper tokens. Thus, while only a specific commodity can
perform in a given country the function of a measure of value and
therefore of money, different commodities can serve as coin side by
side with gold. These subsidiary mediums of circulation, such as silver
or copper coins, represent definite fractions of a gold coin within
the sphere of circulation. Their own silver or copper weight is,
therefore, not determined by the proportions of the respective values
of silver and copper to that of gold, but is arbitrarily fixed by law.
They may be issued only in such quantities in which the diminutive
fractions of gold coin which they represent would constantly circulate
either for purposes of change for gold coins of higher denominations,
or for realizing equally small prices of commodities. In retail trade
silver and copper tokens belong to distinct spheres of circulation. In
the nature of things, the rapidity of their circulation is in inverse
ratio to the price which they realize in each separate purchase or
sale, or to the size of the fraction of gold coin which they represent.
If we consider how immense the volume of the daily retail trade in a
country like England is, we will understand from the comparatively
insignificant proportions of its combined volume how rapid and steady
the circulation of the subsidiary coin must be. From a parliamentary
report of recent date we see, e. g., that in 1857 the English mint
coined £4,859,000 worth of gold, £733,000 of silver nominal value which
contained metal actually worth £363,000. The total amount of gold
coined in the ten years ending December 31, 1857, was £55,239,000, and
of silver only £2,434,000. The supply of copper coin in 1857 amounted
only to £6,720 nominal value containing £3,492 worth of copper; of this
£3,136 was in pennies, £2,464 in half-pennies, and £1,120 in farthings.
The total value of copper coined in the ten years was £141,477 nominal,
the metallic value being £73,503. Just as gold coin is prevented from
permanently retaining its function of coin by the legal provision of
the loss of weight which demonetizes it, so are the silver and copper
tokens prevented from passing from their spheres of circulation into
that of gold coin and acquiring the character of money by the provision
of the maximum amount for which they are legal tender. In England e.
g. copper is legal tender only to the amount of six pence and silver
up to forty shillings. If silver and copper tokens were to be issued
in greater quantities than the requirements of their spheres of
circulation call for, prices of commodities would not rise as a result,
but the accumulation of these tokens in the hands of retail dealers
would reach such an extent that they would be finally compelled to sell
them as metal. Thus in 1798 English copper coins, issued by private
individuals, accumulated in the hands of small traders to the amount
of £20,350 which they tried in vain to put again in circulation, being
finally compelled to throw them as metal on the copper market.[79]

The silver and copper tokens which represent gold coin in certain
spheres of circulation in the interior of the country, contain a
definite quantity of silver and copper prescribed by law, but after
they get into circulation, they wear off like gold coins and become
even more rapidly mere phantoms, according to the rapidity and
steadiness of their circulation. To draw again a line of demonetization
beyond which silver and copper tokens would lose their character of
coins, they would have to be replaced in turn within certain spheres
of their own circulation by some other symbolic money, say iron and
lead, and such representation of one kind of symbolic money by another
kind would form an endless process. In all countries with a well
developed circulation the very requirements of money circulation make
it necessary that the character of silver and copper tokens as money be
made independent of any loss of weight in those coins. Thus, as it was
in the nature of things, it appears that they serve as symbols of gold
coin not because they are symbols made of silver or copper, not because
they have certain value, but only in so far as they have no value.

Relatively worthless things, such as _paper_, can consequently perform
the function of symbols of gold money. That subsidiary currency
consists of metal tokens, such as silver, copper, etc., is mainly due
to the fact that in most countries the less valuable metals such as
silver in England, copper in ancient Rome, Sweden, Scotland, etc.,
had circulated as money before they were degraded by the process of
circulation to the rank of small change and replaced by a more precious
metal. Besides, it is natural that the money symbol which grows
directly out of metallic circulation, should itself be a metal. Just
as that portion of gold which would always have to circulate as small
change, is replaced by metal tokens; so can the other portion of gold
which is constantly absorbed as coin by circulation in the interior of
the country and, therefore, must continually circulate, be replaced
with worthless tokens. The level below which the mass of circulating
coin never sinks is determined in each country by experience. Thus,
the originally imperceptible difference between the nominal weight and
the metallic weight of a metal coin can grow apace until it reaches the
point of absolute separation. The mint name of money parts company with
its substance and exists outside of it in worthless slips of paper.
Just as the exchange value of commodities is crystallized by their
process of exchange into gold money, so is gold money sublimated in
its currency into its own symbol first in the form of worn coin, then
in the form of subsidiary metal currency, and finally in the form of a
worthless token, paper, mere _sign of value_.

Gold coin has produced its substitutes, first metallic and then paper,
only because in spite of its loss of metallic weight it continued to
perform the function of coin. It did not circulate because of its wear
and tear; on the contrary, it wore out to a symbol because it continued
to circulate. Only in so far as gold money becomes simply a token of
its own value in the process of circulation, can mere tokens of value
take its place.

In so far as the movement  represents a dynamic unity of two
processes  and  which pass directly one into the other, or in
so far as a commodity passes through the complete process of its
metamorphosis, it express its exchange value in price and in money
only to discard that form at once and to become again a commodity or,
rather, a use-value. That is to say, it develops _only an apparent
assertion of the independence_ of its exchange value. On the other
hand, we have seen that gold, in so far as it performs the function
of coin or in so far as it continually circulates, actually forms
only a connecting link between the metamorphoses of commodities and
constitutes _but their transitory money form_; furthermore, that it
realizes the price of one set of commodities only in order to realize
that of another, but in no case does it constitute a stable form of
exchange value or appear itself as a commodity in a state of rest. The
reality which the exchange value of commodities acquires in the process
and which is represented by gold in its circulation, is the reality of
an electric spark. Although real gold, it plays the part of fictitious
gold, and can, therefore, be replaced in this function by a token of
itself.

The token of value, say paper, which plays the part of coin, is the
token of a quantity of gold expressed in its currency name, i. e., it
is a gold token. Just as a certain quantity of gold does not in itself
express a value ratio, so is that true of the token which takes its
place. In so far as a certain quantity of gold, as embodied labor-time,
has a value of a certain magnitude, the gold token represents value.
But the magnitude of the value which it represents depends all the
time on the value of the quantity of gold for which it stands. As
regards commodities the token of value expresses _the reality of their
price_, it is _signum pretii_ and sign of their value only because
their value is expressed in their price. In the process , in so
far as it represents the dynamic unity or direct alternation of the
two metamorphoses―and that is the aspect it assumes in the sphere of
circulation in which the token of value discharges its function―the
exchange value of commodities acquires in price only an ideal
expression and in money only an imaginary symbolic existence. Exchange
value thus acquires _only_ an imaginary though material expression,
but it has no real existence except in the commodities themselves, in
so far as a certain quantity of labor-time is embodied in them. It
_appears_, therefore, that the token of value represents _directly_
the value of commodities, by figuring not as a token of gold but as
a token of the value which exists in the commodity alone and is only
expressed in price. But it is a false appearance. The token of value is
directly only _a token of price_, i. e., a _token of gold_, and only
indirectly a token of value of a commodity. Unlike Peter Shlemihl, gold
has not sold its shadow, but buys with its shadow. The token of value
operates only in so far as it represents the price of one commodity
as against that of another within the sphere of circulation, or in so
far as it _represents gold_ to every owner of commodities. A certain
comparatively worthless object such as a piece of leather, a slip of
paper, etc., becomes by force of custom a token of money material, but
maintains its existence in that capacity only so long as its character
as a symbol of money is guaranteed by the general acquiescence of
the owners of commodities, i. e., so long as it enjoys a legally
established conventional existence and compulsory circulation. Paper
money issued by the state and circulating as legal tender is the
perfected form of the token of value, and the only form of paper money,
which has its immediate origin in metallic circulation or even in the
simple circulation of commodities. _Credit money_ belongs to a higher
sphere of the social process of production and is governed by entirely
different laws. Symbolic paper money does not in fact, differ in the
least from subsidiary metal coin, except that it reaches wider spheres
of circulation. We have seen that the mere technical development of the
standard of price or of the mint price and later the shaping of gold
bullion into coin have called forth the interference of the state; this
circumstance brought about a visible separation of national circulation
from the world circulation of commodities: this separation is completed
by the evolution of coin into a token of value. As a mere medium of
circulation money can assume an independent existence only within the
sphere of national circulation.[80]

Our presentation has shown that the coin form of gold as a token of
value differentiated from the gold substance itself, has its direct
origin in the process of circulation and not in any agreement or state
interference. Russia offers a striking example of the natural origin of
the token of value. At the time when hides and furs played there the
part of money, the conflict between the perishable and bulky nature of
the material and its function as a medium of circulation resulted in
the custom of replacing it by small pieces of stamped leather which
thus became a kind of draft payable in hides and furs. Later on they
became under the name of copecs mere tokens for fractions of the silver
rouble and remained in use in some parts until 1700, when Peter the
Great ordered their withdrawal in exchange for small copper coins
issued by the state. Ancient writers who could observe the phenomena
of exclusively metallic circulation, already took the view of coin
as a symbol or token of value. That is true both of _Plato_[81] and
_Aristotle_.[82] In countries where credit is not developed, as e. g.
in China, legal tender paper money is found at an early date[83]. Early
advocates of paper money expressly point out the fact that metallic
coin is transformed into a token of value in the very process of
circulation. So Benjamin Franklin[84] and Bishop Berkeley.[85]

How many reams of paper cut up into bills can circulate as money? Put
in that way, the question would be absurd. The worthless tokens are
signs of value only in so far as they represent gold within the sphere
of circulation and they represent it only to the extent to which it
would itself be absorbed as coin by the process of circulation; this
quantity is determined by its own value, the exchange values of the
commodities and the rapidity of their metamorphoses being given. Bills
of a denomination of £5 could circulate in a quantity five times
less than those of £1 denomination, and if all payments were made in
shilling bills, then twenty times as many shilling bills would have to
be in circulation as are one pound bills. If the gold currency were
represented by bills of different denominations, e. g. five pound,
one pound and ten shilling bills, then the quantity of these different
tokens of value would be determined not only by the quantity of gold
necessary for circulation as a whole, but also by that required in the
sphere of circulation of each kind of bills. If fourteen million pounds
sterling (this is the provision of the English Bank Law, not for the
entire currency but only for credit money) were the level below which
the circulation of a country never sank, then fourteen million paper
bills, each a token of value of one pound, could circulate. If the
value of gold fell or rose because the labor-time necessary for its
production had fallen or risen, then, the exchange value of the same
volume of commodities remaining the same, the number of one pound bills
in circulation would rise or fall in inverse ratio to the change in the
value of gold. If gold were replaced by silver as a measure of value,
the ratio of the respective values of silver and gold being 1:15, and
if each bill were to represent now the same quantity of silver as it
represented gold before, then there would be 210 million one pound
bills in circulation instead of the previous fourteen million. The
number of paper bills is thus determined by the quantity of gold money
which they represent in circulation, and since they are tokens of value
only in so far as they represent it, their value is simply determined
by their _quantity_. Thus, while the quantity of gold in circulation
is determined by the prices of commodities, the value of the paper
bills in circulation, on the contrary, depends exclusively on their own
quantity.

The interference of the state which issues paper money as legal
tender―and we are treating of paper money of that kind only―seems to
do away with the economic law. The state which in its mint price gave
a certain name to a piece of gold of certain weight, and in the act of
coinage only impressed its stamp on gold, seems now to turn paper into
gold by the magic of its stamp. Since paper bills are legal tender,
no one can prevent the state from forcing as large a quantity of them
as it desires into circulation and from impressing upon it any coin
denomination, such as £1, £5, £20. The bills which have once gotten
into circulation can not be removed, since on the one hand their course
is hemmed in by the frontier posts of the country and on the other
they lose all value, use-value, as well as exchange-value, outside
of circulation. Take away from them their function and they become
worthless rags of paper. Yet this power of the state is a mere fiction.
It may throw into circulation any desired quantity of paper bills of
whatever denomination, but with this mechanical act its control ceases.
Once in the grip of circulation and the token of value or paper money
becomes subject to its intrinsic laws.

If fourteen million pounds sterling were the quantity of gold
required for the circulation of commodities and if the state were to
put into circulation two hundred and ten million bills each of the
denomination of £1, then these two hundred and ten millions would
become the representatives of gold to the amount of fourteen million
pounds sterling. It would be the same as if the state were to make
the one pound bills represent a fifteen times less valuable metal or
a fifteen times smaller weight of gold. Nothing would be changed but
the nomenclature of the standard of price, which by its very nature is
conventional, no matter whether such change takes place as a direct
result of a change of the mint standard or indirectly owing to an
increase of paper bills to an extent required by a new lower standard.
Since the name £ would stand now for a fifteen times smaller quantity
of gold, the prices of all commodities would increase fifteen times and
two hundred and ten million one pound bills would now be actually as
necessary as fourteen million had been before. To the same extent to
which the combined quantity of tokens of value would increase now, the
quantity of gold which each of them represents would decrease. The rise
of prices would constitute but a reaction on the part of the process of
circulation which forcibly equates the tokens of value to the quantity
of gold which they are supposed to replace.

In the history of the debasement of money in England and France by
their governments, we find repeatedly that prices had not risen in the
same proportion in which the silver coinage had been debased. That was
simply due to the fact that the proportion in which the currency was
increased did not correspond to the proportion in which it had been
debased; that is to say, because an inadequate quantity of coins of
the poorer metallic composition was issued, if the exchange values
of commodities were to be estimated in the future in the new coin as
a measure of value and be realized in coins corresponding to this
smaller unit of measure. This solves the difficulty left unsettled in
the controversy between Locke and Lowndes. The ratio which a token
of value, whether made of paper or of debased gold or silver, bears
to certain weights of gold or silver estimated according to the mint
price, depends not on its own composition but on the quantity in which
it is found in circulation. The difficulty in understanding this is
due to the fact that money in its two functions of a measure of value
and a medium of circulation is subject to two not only opposite but
apparently contradictory laws corresponding to the difference in the
two functions. In the discharge of its function of a measure of value
where money serves merely as money of account and gold only as ideal
gold, everything depends on the natural substance of money. Estimated
in silver or expressed in silver prices exchange values are naturally
estimated quite differently than when measured in gold or as gold
prices. On the contrary, in its function of a medium of circulation,
where gold is not only imagined but is actually present side by side
with other commodities, its substance is immaterial and everything
depends on its quantity. For the unit of measure the determining factor
is whether it consists of a pound of gold, silver or copper; while in
the case of coin, no matter what its own composition is, it will become
the embodiment of each of these units of measure in accordance with its
quantity. But it goes against common sense that in the case of mere
imaginary money everything should depend on its material substance,
while in that of the palpably present coin all should be determined by
an ideal ratio of numbers.

The rise or fall of prices of commodities following a rise or fall
of the quantity of paper notes―the latter only where paper currency
constitutes the exclusive medium of circulation―is thus nothing but
an assertion through the process of circulation of a law mechanically
violated from without; namely, that the quantity of gold in circulation
is determined by the prices of commodities, and the quantity of tokens
of value in circulation is determined by the quantity of gold coin
which it represents. For that reason any desired number of paper notes
will be absorbed and equally digested by the process of circulation,
because the token of value, no matter with what gold title it may enter
circulation, will be compressed within the latter to a token of that
quantity of gold which could actually circulate in its place.

In the case of the circulation of tokens of value all laws pertaining
to the circulation of real money appear to be reversed and standing
on their heads. While gold circulates because it has value, paper has
value because it circulates. While with a given exchange value of
commodities, the quantity of gold in circulation depends on its own
value, the value of paper depends on its own quantity in circulation.
While the quantity of gold in circulation rises or falls with the
rise or fall of prices of commodities, the prices of commodities
seem to rise or fall with the change in the quantity of paper in
circulation. While the circulation of commodities can absorb only a
definite quantity of gold coin and as a result of that the alternating
contraction and expansion of the currency appears as a necessary law,
paper money seems to enter circulation in any desired amount. While
the state is guilty of debasing gold and silver coin and of disturbing
their function of a medium of circulation, if it turns out a coin,
only 1-100 of a grain below its nominal weight; it performs a perfectly
proper operation by issuing absolutely worthless paper notes which
contain nothing of the metal except its mint denomination. While gold
coin apparently represents the value of commodities only in so far as
that value is itself estimated in gold or is expressed in price, the
token of value seems to represent directly the value of commodities.
It is, therefore, clear why students who examined one-sidedly the
phenomena of circulation of money by confining their observations to
the circulation of legal tender paper money, should have failed to
grasp the intrinsic laws governing the circulation of money. As a
matter of fact, these laws appear not only reversed but extinct in the
circulation of tokens of value, since paper currency, if issued in
the right quantity, goes through certain movements which are not in
its nature as a token of value, while its proper movement instead of
growing directly out of the metamorphosis of commodities, springs from
the violation of its proper proportion to gold.


Money as distinguished from coin, the result of the circulation process forms the starting point of the circulation process , i.
e. the exchange of money for commodity in order to exchange commodity
for money. In the form commodity forms the starting and final
points of the movement; in the form, money plays that part. In
the former case money is the medium of exchange of commodities, in
the latter the commodity helps money to become money. Money which
appears merely as a means of circulation in the first form becomes
an end in the second form; while commodity which appeared first as
the end, now becomes but a means. Since money is itself the result of
circulation, the result of circulation appears at the same time
as its starting point in the form . While in the case of  the
interchange of matter constituted the real import of the process, the
form of the commodity resulting from this first process constitutes the
import of the second process .

In the form  the two extreme members are commodities of the same
value, but qualitatively different use-values. Their mutual exchange
C―C constitutes actual interchange of matter. In the form  the
two extremes are gold and at the same time gold of equal value. To
exchange gold for a commodity in order to exchange the commodity for
gold, or if we consider the final result M―M, to exchange gold for
gold, seems absurd. But if we translate the formula  into the
expression: _to buy_ in order _to sell_, which means nothing but to
exchange gold for gold through an intervening movement, we recognize
at once the prevailing form of capitalist production. In actual
practice, however, people do not buy in order to sell, but they buy
cheap in order to sell dear. Money is exchanged for a commodity in
order to exchange the same commodity for a larger amount of money, so
that the extremes M, M are, if not qualitatively, then quantitatively
different. Such a quantitative difference presupposes the _exchange of
non-equivalents_, yet commodity and money as such are only opposite
forms of the same commodity, i. e. they are different forms of the same
magnitude of value. The circuit  thus conceals under the forms
of money and commodity more highly developed relations of production,
and is but a reflection within the sphere of simple circulation of a
movement of a more advanced character. Money, as distinguished from the
medium of circulation, must therefore be developed from the direct form
of circulation of commodities, .

Gold, i. e., the specific commodity which serves as a measure of
value and a medium of circulation, becomes money without any further
assistance on the part of society. In England, where silver is neither
the measure of value nor the prevailing medium of circulation, it
does not become money, just as gold in Holland, as soon as it had been
dethroned as a measure of value, ceased to be money. A commodity thus
becomes money only in its combined capacity of a measure of value
and medium of circulation; or, the unity of the measure of value and
medium of circulation is money. As such a unity, however, gold has a
separate existence independent of its existence in the two functions.
As a measure of value it is only ideal money and ideal gold; as a mere
medium of circulation it is symbolic money and symbolic gold; but in
its plain metallic bodily form gold is money or money is real gold.

Let us now consider for a moment the commodity gold when it is in a
state of rest, and plays the part of money in its relation to other
commodities. All commodities represent in their prices a certain
quantity of gold, that is to say, they are merely imaginary gold or
imaginary money, representatives of gold, just as, on the other hand,
money in the form of a token of value appeared as a mere representative
of prices of commodities.[86] Since all commodities are thus but
imaginary money, money is the only real commodity. Contrary to
commodities, which only represent the independently existing exchange
value, i. e., universal social labor, or abstract wealth, gold is the
_material form of abstract wealth_. Through its use-value, every
commodity, by its relation to some particular want, expresses only one
aspect of material wealth, but one side of wealth. Money, however,
satisfies every want since it can be directly converted into the object
of any want. Its own use-value is realized in the endless series of
use-values which form its equivalents. In its virgin metallic state
it holds locked up all the material wealth which lies unfolded in the
world of commodities. Thus, while commodities represent in their prices
the universal equivalent or abstract wealth, viz., gold, the latter
represents in its use-value the use-values of all commodities. Gold
is, therefore, _the bodily representative of material wealth_. It is
the “precis de toutes les choses” (Boisguillebert), the compendium
of the wealth of society. At one and the same time, it is the direct
incarnation of universal labor in its form, and the aggregate
of all concrete labor in its substance. It is universal wealth
individualized.[87] As a medium of circulation it underwent all kinds
of injury, was clipped, and even reduced to the condition of a mere
symbolic paper rag. As money it is restored to its golden glory.[88]
From a serve it becomes a lord. From a mere understrapper it rises to
the position of Lord of commodities.[89]

Gold separates itself as money from the process of circulation whenever
a commodity interrupts the process of its metamorphosis and remains
in its form of a gold chrysalis. This occurs every time a sale is not
immediately followed by purchase. The independent isolation of gold
as money is, thus, a material expression of the disintegration of the
process of circulation, or of the metamorphosis of commodities, into
two separate acts independent of each other. The coin itself becomes
money as soon as its course is interrupted. In the hands of the seller
who takes it in exchange for his commodity, it is money and not coin;
as soon as it passes out of his hands it is again coin. Everybody is
a seller of the one commodity which he produces, but a buyer of all
other commodities which he needs for his existence in society. While
his selling is determined by the labor-time required for the production
of his commodity, his buying is determined by the continual renewal
of the wants of life. In order to be able to buy without having sold
anything, he must sell without buying. In fact, the circulation process
 is a dynamic unity of sale and purchase only in so far as it
constitutes at the same time the constant process of its separation.
In order that money should flow continuously as coin, coin must
constantly coagulate as money. The continuous flow of coin depends on
its constant accumulations in the form of reserve-funds of coin which
spring up throughout the sphere of circulation and form sources of
supply; the formation, distribution, disappearance, and reformation of
these reserve funds is constantly changing, their existence constantly
disappears, their disappearance constantly exists. Adam Smith expressed
this never-ceasing transformation of coin into money and of money
into coin by saying that every owner of commodities must always keep
in supply besides the particular commodity which he sells, a certain
quantity of the universal commodity with which he buys. We saw, that
in the process  the second member  splits up into a series of
purchases which do not take place at once, but at intervals of time,
so that one part of M circulates as money while the other rests as
money. Money is in that case only _suspended coin_ and the separate
parts of the circulating mass of coins appear now in one form, now in
another, constantly changing. This first transformation of the medium
of circulation into money represents, therefore, but a technical aspect
of money circulation.[90]

The primitive form of wealth is that of a surplus or superabundance,
i. e., that part of the products which are not immediately required as
use-values, or the possession of such products whose use-value falls
outside the sphere of mere necessaries. When considering the transition
of commodity into money we saw that this surplus or superabundance of
products constitutes the proper sphere of exchange at a low stage of
development of production. Superfluous products become exchangeable
products or commodities. The adequate form of this surplus is gold and
silver, the first form in which wealth as abstract social wealth is
preserved. Commodities can not only be stored up in the form of gold
and silver, i. e., in the substance of money, but gold and silver are
wealth in preserved form. While every use-value performs its service
as such by being consumed, i. e., destroyed, the use-value of gold as
money consists in its being the bearer of exchange value, in embodying
universal labor-time as a shapeless raw material. As shapeless metal,
exchange value possesses an indestructible form. Gold or silver thus
brought to rest as money, forms a _hoard_. Among nations with an
exclusively metallic circulation, such as the ancients were, hoarding
is practiced universally from the individual to the state which guards
its state hoard. In more ancient times, in Asia and Egypt, these
hoards under the protection of kings and priests appear rather as a
mark of their power. In Greece and Rome it was part of public policy
to accumulate state hoards as the safest and most available form of
surplus. The quick transfer of such hoards by conquerors from one
country to another and the sudden outpour of a part of these hoards
into the general circulation constitute a peculiar feature of ancient
economy.

As the incarnation of labor-time gold is a pledge for its own value,
and since it is the embodiment of _universal_ labor-time, the process
of circulation pledges gold its constant rôle of exchange value.
Owing to the mere fact that the owner of commodities can retain his
commodity in the form of exchange value or retain the exchange-value as
a commodity, the exchange of commodities for the purpose of retaining
them in the transformed shape of gold becomes circulation’s own motive.
The metamorphosis  takes place for the sake of the metamorphosis,
i. e., in order to transform it from particular natural wealth into
universal social wealth. Instead of change of matter, change of form
becomes its own purpose. From a mere form of the movement exchange
value becomes its substance. Commodity is preserved as wealth, as
commodity, only in so far as it keeps within the sphere of circulation,
and it keeps in that fluent state only in so far as it solidifies in
the form of silver and gold. It remains in the stream of circulation as
its crystal. At the same time gold and silver themselves become money
only in so far as they do not play the part of mediums of circulation.
_As non-mediums of circulation they become money._ The withdrawal of a
commodity from circulation in the form of gold is therefore the only
means of keeping it constantly within the sphere of circulation.

The owner of commodities can receive money from circulation only
in return for a commodity which he gives to it. Constant selling,
continual throwing of commodities into circulation is, therefore, the
first condition of hoarding from the standpoint of the circulation
of commodities. On the other hand, money as a medium of circulation
constantly disappears in the very process of circulation by being
realized all the time in use-values and becoming dissolved in fleeting
pleasures. It must, therefore, be taken out of the all-consuming
stream of circulation or the commodity must be kept up in its first
metamorphosis, so that money is prevented from performing its function
of a means of purchase. The commodity owner who has now become a
hoarder, must sell as much as possible and buy as little as possible,
as old Cato had taught: “patrem familias vendacem, non emacem esse.”
While industry constitutes the positive condition of hoarding, saving
forms the negative one. The less the equivalent of a commodity is
withdrawn from circulation in the form of particular commodities
or use-values, the more it is withdrawn in the shape of money or
exchange value.[91] The acquisition of wealth in its universal form
thus requires abstinence from wealth in its material reality. Thus
the stimulating impulse for hoarding is _greed_, the objects of which
are not commodities as use-values, but exchange value as commodity.
In order to get possession of the surplus in its universal form, the
particular wants must be treated as so much luxury and excess. Thus
the Cortes presented a report to Philipp II., in 1593, in which, among
other things, was said: “The Cortes of Valladolid in the year 1586
petitioned Your Majesty not to allow the further importation into the
Kingdom of candles, glassware, jewelry, knives and similar articles;
these things useless to human life come from abroad to be exchanged
for gold, as though the Spaniards were Indians.” The hoarder despises
the worldly, temporary and transitory enjoyments in his hunt after
the eternal treasure, which neither moth nor rust can eat, which is
perfectly celestial and earthly at the same time. “The general remote
cause of our want of money is the great excess of this Kingdom in
consuming the Commodities of Forreine Countries, which prove to us
discommodities, in hindering us of so much treasure, which otherwise
would bee brought in, in lieu of those toyes.... Wee ... consume
amongst us, that great abundance of the Wines of Spaine, of France, of
the Rhene, of the Levant ... the Raisins of Spaine, the Corints of the
Levant, the Lawnes and Cambricks of Hannaults ... the Silkes of Italie,
the Sugers and Tobaco of the West Indies, the Spices of the East
Indies: All which are of no necessetie unto us and yet are bought with
ready mony.”[92]

In the form of gold and silver, wealth is indestructible, both
because exchange value is preserved in the shape of indestructible
metal, and, especially, because gold and silver are prevented from
becoming, as mediums of circulation, mere vanishing money forms of
the commodity. The destructible substance is thus sacrificed for the
indestructible form. “If money be taken (by means of taxation) from
him, who spendeth the same ... upon eating and drinking, or any other
perishing Commodity; and the same transferred to one that bestoweth it
on Cloaths; I say that even in this case the Commonwealth hath some
little advantage; because Cloaths do not altogether perish so soon as
Meats and Drinks. But if the same be spent in Furniture of Houses,
the advantage is yet a little more; if in Building of Houses, yet
more; if in improving of Lands, working of Mines, Fishing, etc., yet
more; but most of all, in bringing Gold and Silver into the Country;
because those things are not only not perishable, but are esteemed
for Wealth at all times and everywhere; whereas other Commodities
which are perishable, or whose value depends upon the Fashion; or
which are contingently scarce and plentiful, are Wealth, but pro hic
et nunc.”[93] The withdrawal of money from the stream of circulation
and the saving of it from the social interchange of matter reaches
its extreme form in the _burying_ of money, so that social wealth is
brought as an underground indestructible treasure into a perfectly
secret private relation with the owner of commodities. Dr. Bernier, who
stayed for some time at the court of Aurenzeb at Delhi, tells us how
the merchants, especially the Mohammedan heathens, who control nearly
all the trade and all money, secretly bury their money deep in the
ground, “being imbued with the faith that the gold and silver which
they put away during their lives will serve them after death in the
next world.”[94] However, in so far as the asceticism of the hoarder is
combined with active industry, he is rather a Protestant by religion
and still more a Puritan. “It can not be denied that buying and selling
are necessary, that one can not get along without them, and that one
can buy like a Christian especially things that serve in need and in
honor; for the patriarchs had also bought and sold cattle, wool, grain,
butter, milk and other goods. They are gifts of God which He gives out
of the earth and divides among men. But foreign trade which brings
over from Calcutta, India and other such places commodities consisting
of costly silks, and gold ware, and spices which only serve for luxury
and are of no use, draining the land and the people of their money,
should not be tolerated if we but had a government of princes. Yet I
do not wish to write of that now, for I believe it will have to stop
of itself, when we have no money any longer; and so will luxury and
gluttony; for no writing or teaching will help until want and poverty
will force us.”[95]

In times of disturbance in the process of the social interchange of
matter, the burying of money takes place even in bourgeois societies
which are at a high stage of development. The social bond in its
compact form is being saved from the social movement (with the owner
of commodities this bond is the commodity and the adequate form of the
commodity is money). The social _nervus rerum_ is buried next to the
body whose nerve it is.

The hoard would now become mere useless metal, its money soul would
depart from it and it would remain as the burnt ashes of circulation,
as its caput mortuum, if it did not constantly tend to get back into
circulation. Money, or crystallized exchange value, is, according to
its nature, the form of abstract wealth; but, on the other hand, any
given sum of money is a quantitatively limited magnitude of value.
The quantitative limitation of exchange value is in contradiction
with its qualitative universality and the hoarder conceives in it a
barrier which turns, in fact, into a qualitative barrier as well and
makes of the hoard merely a limited representative of material wealth.
Money, in its capacity of a universal equivalent, appears, as we have
seen, as a member of an equation, the other member of which consists
of an endless series of commodities. It depends on the magnitude of
the exchange value to what extent money will be realized in such an
endless series, i. e., to what degree it corresponds to the conception
of it as an exchange value. The automatic movement of exchange value
as exchange value can only tend to its passing beyond its quantitative
limits. But by exceeding the quantitative limits of the hoard a new
limit is created which must be removed in its turn. There is no
definite limit which appears as a barrier to further hoarding, every
limit plays that part. Hoard accumulation has, therefore, no inherent
limits, no inherent measure; it is an endless process which finds in
each successive result an impulse for a new beginning. While the hoard
is increased only by being preserved, it is preserved only by being
increased.

Money is not only _an_ object of the passion for riches; it is _the_
object of that passion. The latter is essentially _auri sacra fames_.
The passion for riches, contrary to that for special kinds of natural
wealth or use-values, such as clothing, ornaments, herds, etc., is
possible only when universal wealth has been individualized as such
in a particular object and can, therefore, be retained in the form of
a single commodity. Money appears then no less as an object than as
a source of the passion for riches.[96] The underlying fact of the
matter is that exchange value as such and with it its increase become
the final aim. Greed holds the hoard fast by not allowing the money
to become a medium of circulation, but the thirst for gold saves the
money soul of the hoard by keeping up the lasting affinity of gold for
circulation.

To sum up, the activity by which hoards are built up resolves itself
into withdrawal of money from circulation by continually repeated
sales, and simple hoarding or _accumulation_. In fact, it is only
in the sphere of simple circulation and, especially, in the form of
hoarding, that accumulation of wealth as such takes place, while, as we
shall see later, in the case of other so-called forms of accumulation
it is only a misnomer to call them by that name in mere recollection
of the simple accumulation of money. All other commodities are hoarded
either as use-values, in which case the manner of storing them up is
determined by the peculiarities of their use-value: the storing of
grain, e. g., requires special equipment; the accumulation of sheep
makes one a shepherd; the accumulation of slaves and land creates
relations of master and servant, etc.; the accumulation of particular
kinds of wealth requires special processes different from the simple
act of hoarding, and develops special individual traits. Or, wealth
in the form of commodities is hoarded as exchange-value and in that
case hoarding appears as a commercial or a specific economic operation.
The one who carries on such operations becomes a dealer in corn, in
cattle, etc. Gold and silver are money not through some activity of
the individual who accumulates it, but as crystals of the process of
circulation which goes on without any aid on his part. He has nothing
to do but to put them aside, adding new weights of metal to his
hoard, a perfectly senseless operation which, if applied to all other
commodities, would deprive them of all value.[97]

Our hoarder appears as a martyr of exchange value, a holy ascetic
crowning the metal pillar. He cares for wealth only in its social
form and therefore he buries it away from society. He wants to have
the commodity in the form in which it is always capable of entering
circulation and therefore he withdraws it from circulation. He dreams
of exchange value and therefore does not exchange. The fluid form of
wealth and its petrification, the elixir of life and the stone of
wisdom madly haunt each other in alchemic fashion. In his imaginary
unlimited passion for enjoyment he denies himself all enjoyment.
Because he wishes to satisfy all social wants, he barely satisfies
his elementary natural wants. While holding fast to his wealth in
its metallic bodily form, the latter escapes him as a phantom. As a
matter of fact, however, the hoarding of money for the sake of money
is the barbaric form of production for production’s sake, i. e., the
development of the productive forces of social labor beyond the limits
of ordinary wants. The less the production of commodities is developed,
the more important is the first crystallization of exchange value into
money, or hoarding, which plays, therefore, an important part among
the ancient nations, in Asia until the present day, and among modern
agricultural nations where exchange value has not as yet taken hold of
all the relations of production. Before taking up the consideration
of the specific economic function of hoarding within the sphere of
metallic circulation, let us mention another form of hoarding.

Quite apart from their aesthetic properties, silver and gold
commodities are convertible into money, since the material of which
they are made is a money material; and, inversely, gold money and gold
bullion can be converted into commodities. Because gold and silver
constitute the material of abstract wealth, the greatest display
of wealth consists of the utilization of these metals as concrete
use-values, and if the owner of commodities hides his treasure at
certain stages of production, he is very anxious to appear before
other owners of commodities as _rico hombre_ whenever he can do so
with safety. He gilds himself and his house.[98] In Asia, especially
in India, where, unlike under the capitalist system, the hoarding
of wealth appears not as a subordinate function of the system of
production, but as an end in itself, gold and silver commodities are
practically but aesthetic forms of hoards. In mediaeval England gold
and silver commodities were considered before the law as mere forms of
treasure, since their value was but slightly increased by the crude
labor spent upon them. They were destined to re-enter circulation
and their fineness was therefore prescribed in the same manner as
that of coin. The increasing use of gold and silver as objects of
luxury with the growth of wealth is such a simple matter that it was
perfectly clear to the ancients,[99] while modern economists have
advanced the erroneous proposition that the use of silver and gold
articles increases not in proportion to the growth of wealth, but
in proportion to the fall in value of the precious metals. Their
otherwise accurate references to the use of Californian and Australian
gold are inconclusive, since the increased consumption of gold as a
raw material does not find justification, according to their theory,
in any corresponding decline in its value. From 1810 to 1830, in
consequence of the struggle of the American colonies against Spain and
the interruption of mining caused by revolutions, the annual average
production of precious metals declined by more than one-half. The
decline of coin in circulation in Europe amounted to nearly one-sixth,
comparing the years 1829 and 1809. Although the quantity produced had
thus declined and the cost of production, if it had changed at all,
had increased, yet the consumption of precious metals as objects of
luxury increased to an extraordinary extent in England during the very
war and on the continent after the Peace of Paris. The consumption
increased with the general growth of wealth.[100] It may be stated
as a general law that the conversion of gold and silver money into
articles of luxury prevails in times of peace, while their reconversion
into bullion or even coin takes place in stormy periods.[101] How
considerable the proportion is of the gold and silver treasure in the
form of articles of luxury to the quantity of precious metals serving
as money may be seen from the fact that in 1829 the proportion in
England, according to Jacob, was two to one, and in entire Europe and
America the precious metals in the form of articles of luxury exceeded
those in the form of money by one-fourth.

We have seen that the circulation of money is but the manifestation of
the metamorphoses of commodities, or of the form under which the social
interchange of matter takes place. With the change in the total price
of commodities in circulation or in the volume of their simultaneous
metamorphoses, the rapidity of their change of form in each case being
given, the total quantity of gold in circulation must always expand
or contract. That is possible only under the condition that the total
quantity of money in the country continually bear a varying ratio to
the quantity of money in circulation. This condition is met by the
process of hoarding. With a fall in prices or rise in the rapidity
of circulation, the hoard-reservoirs absorb that part of money which
is thrown out of circulation; with a rise in price or a decline in
the rapidity of circulation, the hoards open up and return a part
of their contents to the stream of circulation. The solidification
of circulating money into hoards and the outpouring of hoards into
circulation is a constantly oscillating movement in which the
prevalence of the one or the other tendency is determined exclusively
by fluctuations in the circulation of commodities. Hoards thus serve as
conduits for the supply and withdrawal of money to or from circulation,
so that every time only that quantity of money circulates as coin which
is required by the immediate needs of circulation. If the volume of the
entire circulation suddenly expands and the fluent unity of sale and
purchase assumes such dimensions that the total sum of prices to be
realized increases more rapidly than the rapidity of the circulation of
money, the hoards decrease perceptibly; but when the combined movement
slackens to an unusual extent, or the movement of buying and selling
steadies itself, the medium of circulation solidifies into money in
large measure, and the treasure reservoirs fill up far above their
average level. In countries with an exclusively metallic circulation
or where production is at a low stage of development, the hoards are
endlessly split up and scattered all over the land, while in countries
where the capitalist system is developed they are concentrated in bank
reservoirs. Hoards are not to be confounded with coin reservoirs, which
form a constituent part of the total supply of money in circulation,
while the interaction between hoards and currency implies the decline
or rise of its total supply. Gold and silver commodities form, as we
have seen, both conduits for the withdrawal of precious metals, as
well as sources of their supply. In ordinary times only their former
function is of importance to the economy of metallic circulation.[102]


b. MEANS OF PAYMENT.

The two forms which have so far distinguished money from the
circulating medium are those of _suspended coin_ and of the _hoard_.
The temporary transformation of coin into money in the case of the
former means that the second phase of , namely purchase ,
must break up within a certain sphere of circulation into a series
of successive purchases. As to hoarding, it is simply based on the
isolation of the act  when it does not immediately pass into ,
or is but an independent development of the first metamorphosis of
a commodity; it represents money as the result of the alienation of
all commodities in contradistinction to the medium of circulation as
the embodiment of commodities in their always alienable form. Coin
reserves and hoards are money only as non-circulating mediums and
are non-circulating mediums only because they do not circulate. In
the capacity in which we consider money now, it circulates or enters
circulation, but does not perform the function of a circulating medium.
As a medium of circulation money is always a means of purchase, now it
does not act in that capacity.

As soon as money develops through the process of hoarding into the
embodiment of abstract social wealth and the tangible representative
of material wealth, it assumes in that capacity special functions
within the process of circulation. If money circulates merely as a
medium of circulation and therefore as a means of purchase, it is
understood that commodity and money confront each other at the same
time, i. e., that the same value is present in a double form: at one
pole, as a commodity in the hands of the seller; at the other pole as
money in the hands of the buyer. This simultaneous existence of the two
equivalents at opposite poles and their simultaneous change of places
or mutual alienation presupposes in its turn that seller and buyer
enter into relations as owners of equivalents that are on hand. But in
the course of time, the process of the metamorphosis of commodities
which produces the different forms of money, transforms also the owners
of commodities or changes the character in which they appear before
each other in the community. In the process of metamorphosis of the
commodity the guardian of the latter changes his skin as often as
the commodity changes place or as the money assumes new forms. Thus,
the owners of commodities originally confronted each other only as
commodity owners, but later on they became one a buyer, the other a
seller; then each became alternately buyer and seller, then hoarders,
and finally rich men. In that manner, the owners of commodities do not
come out of the process of circulation the same men that they entered.
In fact the different forms which money assumes in the process of
circulation are but crystallized changes of form of the commodities
themselves, which in their turn are but concrete expressions of the
changing social relations in which commodity owners carry on the
interchange of matter with one another. New trade relations spring up
in the process of circulation, and, as representatives of these changed
relations, commodity owners assume new economic roles. Just as gold
becomes idealized within the process of circulation and plain paper,
in its capacity of a representative of gold, performs the function
of money, so does the same process of circulation lend the weight of
actual seller and buyer to the buyer and seller who enter it merely as
representatives of future money and future commodities.

All the forms in which gold develops into money, are but the unfolding
of potentialities which the metamorphosis of commodities bears within
itself. These forms did not become distinctly differentiated in the
process of simple money circulation where money appears as coin and
the movement  forms a dynamic unity; at most, they appeared
as mere potentialities as, e. g., in the case of the break in the
metamorphosis of a commodity. We have seen that in the process 
the relations between the commodity and money were those of an actual
use-value and ideal exchange-value to an actual exchange value and
only ideal use-value. By alienating his commodity as a use-value the
seller realized its own exchange value and the use-value of money. On
the contrary, the buyer, by alienating his money as exchange value,
realized its own use-value and the price of the commodity. Commodity
and money changed places accordingly. When it comes to a realization
in actual life of this bi-polar contrast, a new break occurs. The
seller actually alienates his commodity, but realizes its price only in
idea: he has sold his commodity at its price, which is to be realized,
however, only subsequently, at a time agreed upon. The purchaser buys
as the representative of future money, while the vender sells as the
owner of present goods. On the part of the vender, the commodity as
use-value is actually alienated, without the price being actually
realized; on the part of the purchaser, money is actually realized
in the use-value of the commodity, without being actually alienated
as exchange value. Instead of a token of value representing money
symbolically as was the case before, the purchaser himself performs
that part now. And just as in the former case the symbolic nature of
the token of value called forth the guarantee of the state which has
made it legal tender, so does the personal symbolism of the buyer bring
about legally enforcible private contracts among commodity owners.

The contrary may happen in the process , where the money can be
alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way the price of the
commodity can be realized before the use-value of the money is realized
and the commodity actually delivered. This occurs constantly under
the everyday form of pre-payments. And it is under this form that the
English government purchases opium from the ryots of India, or, foreign
merchants residing in Russia mostly buy agricultural products. In these
cases, however, the money always acts in its well known role of a means
of purchase and therefore, does not assume any new forms.[103] We need
not dwell, therefore, on this case any longer; but with reference to
the changed form which the two processes  and  assume now, we
may note that the difference between purchase and sale which appeared
but imaginary in the direct process of circulation, now becomes a real
difference, since in the former case only the money is present and in
the latter only the commodity, and in either case only that extreme is
present from which the initiative comes. Besides, the two forms have
this in common: that in either, one of the equivalents is present only
in the common will of the buyer and seller,―a will that is binding on
both and assumes definite legal forms.

Seller and buyer become creditor and debtor. While the commodity
owner looked comical as the guardian of a treasure, he now becomes
awe-inspiring, since he no longer identifies himself but his neighbor
with a certain sum of money and makes him and not himself a martyr of
exchange value. From a believer he becomes a creditor, for religion he
substitutes law.

  “I stay here on my bond!”

Thus, in the modified form  in which the commodity is present and
money is only represented, money plays first of all the part of a
measure of value. The exchange value of the commodity is estimated in
money as its measure; but as exchange value, established by contract,
price exists not only in the mind of the seller, but also as a measure
of obligation on the part of the buyer. Besides serving as a measure of
value, money plays here the part of a means of purchase, although in
that capacity it only casts ahead the shadow of its future existence.
It attracts the commodity from its position in the hand of the seller
into that of the buyer. As soon as the term of the contract expires,
money enters circulation, since it changes its position by passing
from the hands of the former buyer into those of the former seller.
But it does not enter circulation as a circulating medium or as a
means of purchase. It performed those functions before it was present
and it appears after it has ceased to perform them. It now enters
circulation as the only adequate equivalent of the commodity, as the
absolute form of existence of exchange value, as the last word of the
process of exchange, in short as money, and money in its distinct role
of a _universal means of payment_. In this capacity of a means of
payment money appears as the absolute commodity, but within the sphere
of circulation and not without it as was the case with hoards. The
difference between the means of purchase and the means of payment makes
itself unpleasantly felt in periods of commercial crises.[104]

Originally, the conversion of the product into money in the sphere of
circulation appears only as an individual necessity for the commodity
owner in so far as his own product has no use-value to him, but has
to acquire it first by being alienated. But in order to pay at the
expiration of the contract, he must have sold commodities before that.
Thus, entirely apart from his individual wants, the movement of the
circulation process makes selling a social necessity with every owner
of commodities. As a former buyer of a commodity he is compelled to
become a seller of another commodity in order to get money not as a
means of purchase but as a means of payment, as the absolute form of
exchange value. The conversion of commodity into money as a final act,
or the first metamorphosis of a commodity as an end in itself which in
the case of hoarding seemed to be a matter of caprice on the part of
the commodity owner, becomes now an economic function. The motive and
essence of sale for the sake of payment becomes from a mere form of the
process of circulation its self emanating substance.

In this form of sale the commodity completes its change of position;
it circulates while it postpones its first metamorphosis, viz. its
transformation into money. On the contrary, on the part of the buyer
the second metamorphosis is completed, i. e. money is reconverted
into a commodity before the first metamorphosis has taken place,
i. e., before the commodity has been turned into money. The first
metamorphosis thus takes place after the second in point of time;
and thereby, money i. e. the form of the commodity in its first
metamorphosis, acquires a new destination. Money or the spontaneous
development of exchange value, is no longer a mere intermediary form of
the circulation of commodities, but its final result.

That such _time sales_ in which the two poles of the sale are separated
in point of time, have their natural origin in the simple circulation
of commodities, requires no elaborate proof. In the first place, the
development of circulation leads to a continual repetition of the
mutual transactions between the same commodity owners who confront
each other as seller and buyer. The repetition is not accidental; on
the contrary, goods are ordered, let us say, for a certain date in the
future when they are to be delivered and paid for. In that case the
sale is ideal, i. e. it is legally accomplished without the actual
presence of the goods and money. Both forms of money, those of a medium
of circulation and of a means of payment still coincide here, since
in the first place, commodity and money change places simultaneously,
and secondly, the money does not buy the commodity, but realizes the
price of the commodity purchased before. In the second place, the
nature of a great many use-values makes the simultaneous alienation
and delivery of the goods impossible, and delivery has to be postponed
for a certain time; e. g., when the use of a house is sold for one
month, the use-value of the house is delivered only at the expiration
of the month, although it changes hands at the beginning of the month.
Since the actual transfer of the use-value and its virtual alienation
are separated here in point of time, the realization of its price
occurs also after its change of place. Finally, the difference in
the seasons and in the length of time required for the production of
various commodities brings about a situation where one tries to sell
his goods, while the other is not ready to buy; and with the repeated
purchases and sales between the same commodity owners the two ends
of sale fall apart according to the conditions of production of the
respective commodities. Thus arises a relation of creditor and debtor
between the owners of commodities which, though constituting the
natural foundation of the credit system, may be fully developed before
the latter comes into existence. It is clear that with the extension
of the credit system, and, consequently, with the development of the
capitalist system of production in general, the function of money as a
means of payment will extend at the expense of its function as a means
of purchase and, still more, as an element of hoarding. In England, e.
g., money as coin has been almost completely banished into the sphere
of retail and petty trade between producers and consumers, while it
dominates the sphere of large commercial transactions as a means of
payment.[105]

As the universal means of payment money becomes the _universal
commodity_ of all contracts, at first only in the sphere of
circulation of commodities.[106] But with the development of this
function of money, all other forms of payment are gradually converted
into money payments. The extent to which money is developed as the
exclusive means of payment indicates the degree to which exchange value
has taken hold of production in its depth and breadth.[107]

The volume of money in circulation, as a means of payment, is
determined in the first place, by the amount of payments, i. e. by the
sum total of the prices of the commodities alienated, but not about to
be alienated, as in the case of the simple circulation of money. The
quantity thus determined is subject, however, to two modifications.
The first modification is due to the rapidity with which the same
piece of money repeats the same function, i. e. with which the several
payments succeed one another. A pays B, whereupon B pays C, and so
forth. The rapidity with which the same coin repeats its function
as a means of payment, depends first, upon the continuity of the
relation of creditor and debtor among the owners of commodities, the
same commodity owner being the creditor of one person and the debtor
of another, etc., and secondly, upon the interval which separates the
times of various payments. This chain of payments or of supplementary
first metamorphoses of commodities is qualitatively different from the
chain of metamorphoses which is formed by the circulation of money as a
circulating medium. The latter not only makes its appearance gradually,
but is even formed in that manner. A commodity is first converted
into money, then again into a commodity, thereby enabling another
commodity to become money, etc.; or, seller becomes buyer, whereby
another commodity owner turns seller. This successive connection is
accidentally formed in the very process of the exchange of commodities.
But when the money which A has paid to B is passed on from B to C,
from C to D, etc., and that, too, at intervals rapidly succeeding one
another, then this external connection reveals but an already existing
social connection. The same money passes through different hands not
because it appears as a means of payment; it passes as a means of
payment because the different hands have already clasped each other.
The rapidity with which money circulates as a means of payment thus
shows that individuals have been drawn into the process of circulation
much deeper than would be indicated by the same rapidity of the
circulation of money as coin or as a means of purchase.

The sum total of prices made up by all the purchases and sales taking
place at the same time, and, therefore, side by side, constitutes the
limit for the substitution of the volume of coin by the rapidity of its
circulation. If the payments that are to be made simultaneously are
concentrated at one place―which naturally arises at first at points
where the circulation of commodities is largest―the payments balance
each other as negative and positive quantities: A is under obligations
to pay B, while he has to be paid by C. etc. The quantity of money
required as a means of payment will, therefore, be determined not by
the total amount of payments which have to be made simultaneously, but
by the greater or less concentration of the same and by the magnitude
of the balance remaining after their mutual neutralization as negative
and positive quantities. Special arrangements are made for settlements
of this kind even where the credit system is not developed at all,
as was the case e. g. in ancient Rome. The consideration of these
arrangements, however, as well as that of the general time limits of
payment, which are everywhere established among certain elements in the
community, does not belong here. We may add that the specific influence
which these time settlements exert on the periodic fluctuations in the
quantity of money in circulation, has been scientifically investigated
but lately.

In so far as the payments mutually balance as positive and negative
quantities, no money actually appears on the scene. It figures here
only in its capacity of a measure of value: first, in the prices of
commodities, and second, in the magnitude of mutual obligations. Aside
from its ideal form, exchange value does not exist here independently,
not even in the form of a token of value; that is to say, money plays
here only the part of ideal money of account. The function of money
as a means of payment thus implies a contradiction. On the one hand,
in so far as payments balance, it serves only ideally as a measure of
value. On the other hand, in so far as a payment has actually to be
made, money enters circulation not as a transient circulating medium,
but as the final resting form of the universal equivalent, as the
absolute commodity, in a word, as money. Therefore, whenever such a
thing as a chain of payments and an artificial system of settling them,
is developed, money suddenly changes its visionary nebulous shape as a
measure of value, turning into hard cash or means of payment, as soon
as some shock causes a violent interruption of the flow of payments and
disturbs the mechanism of their settlement. Thus, under conditions of
fully developed capitalist production, where the commodity owner has
long become a capitalist, knows his Adam Smith, and condescendingly
laughs at the superstition that gold and silver alone constitute money
or that money differs at all from other commodities as the absolute
commodity, money suddenly reappears not as a medium of circulation,
but as the only adequate form of exchange value, as the only form of
wealth, exactly as it is looked upon by the hoarder. In its capacity
of such an exclusive form of wealth, it reveals itself, unlike under
the monetary system, not in mere imaginary, but in actual depreciation
and worthlessness of all material wealth. That is what constitutes
the particular phase of crises of the world market which is known as
a money crisis. The _summum bonum_ for which everybody is crying at
such times as for the only form of wealth, is cash, hard cash; and by
the side of it all other commodities just because they are use-values,
appear useless like so many trifles and toys, or, as our Dr. Martin
Luther says, as mere objects of ornament and gluttony. This sudden
reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps
theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers by
whose agency circulation is affected shudder before the impenetrable
mystery in which their own economical relations are involved.[108]

Payments, in their turn, require the formation of reserve funds,
the accumulation of money as a means of payment. The building up of
reserve funds appears no longer as a practice carried on outside of
the sphere of circulation, as in the case of hoarding; nor as a mere
technical accumulation of coin, as in the case of coin reserves; on the
contrary, money must now be gradually accumulated to be available on
certain future dates when payments become due. While hoarding, in its
abstract form as a means of enrichment, declines with the development
of the capitalist system of production, that species of hoarding which
is directly called for by the process of production, increases; or, to
put it differently, a part of the treasure which is generally formed
in the sphere of circulation of commodities, is absorbed as a reserve
fund of means of payment. The more developed the capitalist system of
production, the more these reserve funds are limited to the necessary
minimum. Locke, in his work “On the Lowering of Interest”[109]
furnishes interesting data with reference to the size of these reserve
funds in his time. They show what a considerable part of the total
money in circulation the reservoirs for means of payment absorbed in
England just at the time when banking began to develop.

The law as to quantity of money in circulation, as it has been
formulated in the analysis of the simple circulation of money, receives
an essential modification when the circulation of the means of payment
is taken into account. The rapidity of the circulation of money whether
as circulating medium or as means of payment―being given, the total
amount of money in circulation at a given time will be determined by
the sum total of the prices of commodities to be realized, _plus_ the
total amount of payments falling due at the same time, _minus_ the
amount of payments balancing each other. The general law that the
volume of money in circulation depends on the prices of commodities is
not affected by this in the least, since the extent of the payments
is itself determined by the prices stipulated in contracts. What is,
however, strikingly demonstrated, is that even if the rapidity of
circulation and the economy of payments be assumed to remain the same,
the sum total of the prices of the commodities circulating in a given
period of time, say one day, and the volume of money in circulation on
the same day are by no means equal, because there is a large number
of commodities in circulation whose prices have yet to be realized in
money at a future date, and there is a quantity of money in circulation
which constitutes the payment for commodities which have long gone out
of circulation. The latter amount will depend on the sum of payments
falling due on the same day although contracted for at entirely
different periods.

We have seen that a change in the values of gold and silver does not
affect their function as measures of value or money of account. But
this change is of decisive importance for money as a hoard, since
with the rise or fall of value of gold and silver, the total value
of a gold or silver hoard will also rise or fall. Of still greater
importance is the effect of this change on money as a means of payment.
The payment takes place after the sale of the commodity, or the money
serves in two different capacities at two different periods; first, as
a measure of value, then as a means of payment corresponding to the
measurement. If, during this interval, the value of the precious metals
or the labor-time necessary for their production undergoes a change,
the same quantity of gold or silver will be worth more or less when
it appears as a means of payment than what it was when it served as a
measure of value, i. e., when the contract was concluded. The function
of a particular commodity, like gold or silver, to serve as money or
independent exchange value comes here in conflict with the nature of
the particular commodity whose magnitude of value depends on changes in
the cost of its production. The great social revolution which caused
the fall in value of the precious metals in Europe, is as well known as
the revolution of an opposite character which had been brought about
at an early period in the history of the ancient Roman republic by the
rise in value of copper in terms of which the debts of the plebeians
had been contracted. Without attempting here to follow any further
the fluctuations of value of the precious metals and their effect on
the system of bourgeois political economy, it is at once apparent
that a fall in the value of the precious metals favors the debtors at
the expense of the creditors, while a rise in their value favors the
creditors at the expense of the debtors.


Gold becomes money as distinguished from coin only after it is
withdrawn from circulation in the shape of a hoard; it then enters
circulation as a non-medium of circulation, and finally breaks through
the barriers of home circulation to assume the part of a universal
equivalent in the world of commodities. It becomes _world money_.

While the general measures of weight of the precious metals served as
their original measures of value, the reverse process takes place now
in the world market, and the reckoning names of money are turned back
into corresponding weight names. In the same way, while shapeless crude
metal (aes rude) was the original form of the medium of circulation
and the coin form constituted but the official stamp certifying that a
given piece of metal was of a certain weight, now the precious metal
in its capacity of a world coin throws off its stamp and shape and
reassumes the indistinguishable bullion form; and even if national
coins, such as Russian imperials, Mexican dollars, and English
sovereigns, do circulate abroad, their name is of no importance,
and only their contents count. Finally, as international money, the
precious metals come again to perform their original function of
mediums of exchange, which, like the exchange of commodities, arose
first not within the various primitive communities, but at their points
of contact with one another. As world money, money thus reassumes its
primitive form. On leaving the sphere of home circulation, it strips
off the particular forms which it has acquired in the course of the
development of the process of exchange within that particular national
sphere, those local garbs of standard of price, of coin, of auxiliary
coin, and of token of value.

We have seen that in the home circulation of a country, only one
commodity serves as a measure of value. Since, however, that function
is performed by gold in some countries and by silver in others, there
is a double standard of value in the world market and money assumes
two forms in all its other functions. The translation of the values
of commodities from gold prices into silver prices and vice versa
depends in each case upon the relative value of the two metals, which
is constantly changing and, therefore, appears to be constantly in the
process of determination. Commodity owners in every national sphere
of circulation have to use gold and silver alternately for foreign
circulation and thus to exchange the metal which is accepted as money
at home for the metal which they happen to need as money abroad. Every
nation is, therefore, utilizing both metals, gold and silver, as world
money.

In the international circulation of commodities, gold and silver appear
not as mediums of circulation, but as universal mediums of exchange.
The universal medium of exchange performs its function only under its
two developed forms of a means of purchase and of a means of payment,
whose mutual relation in the world market is the very reverse of what
it is at home. In the sphere of home circulation, money in the form of
coin, played exclusively the part of a means of purchase, either as the
intermediary in the dynamic unity  or as the representative of the
transient form of exchange value in the unceasing change of positions
by commodities. In the world market it is just the contrary. Gold and
silver appear here as a means of purchase when the exchange of matter
is but one-sided, and purchase and sale do not coincide. The frontier
trade at Kiachta e. g. is both actually and according to treaty, one
of barter, in which silver plays only the part of a measure of value.
The war of 1857-58 compelled the Chinese to sell without buying. Silver
suddenly appeared now as a means of purchase. Out of regard to the
letter of the treaty, the Russians made up the French five frank coins
into crude silver commodities, which were made to serve as a means
of exchange. Silver has always served as a means of purchase between
Europe and America on one side and Asia on the other, where it settles
down in the form of hoards. Furthermore, the precious metals serve
as international means of purchase whenever the ordinary balance of
exchange of matter between two nations is suddenly upset, as e. g. when
a failure of crops forces one of them to buy on an extraordinary scale.
Finally, the precious metals are international means of purchase in
the hands of gold and silver producing countries, in which case they
directly constitute a product and commodity and not merely a converted
form of a commodity. The more the exchange of commodities between
different national spheres of circulation is developed, the more
important becomes the function of world money to serve as a _means of
payment_ for the settlement of international balances.

Like home circulation, international circulation requires a constantly
changing quantity of gold and silver. A part of the accumulated hoards
serves therefore, in each country as a reserve fund of world money,
which now declines, now rises, according to the fluctuations of the
exchange of commodities.[110] Besides the special movements which take
place between national spheres of circulation, world-money possesses
a universal movement, whose starting points are at the sources of
production from which gold and silver streams spread out in different
directions all over the world market. Here gold and silver enter the
world circulation as commodities and are exchanged for commodity
equivalents in proportion to the labor-time contained in them, before
they penetrate national spheres of circulation. In the latter, they
appear now with a given magnitude of value. Every fall or rise in the
cost of their production equally affects, therefore, their relative
value throughout the world market; on the other hand, that value is
entirely independent of the extent to which the different national
spheres of circulation absorb gold or silver. The part of the metal
stream which is caught up by every separate sphere in the world of
commodities, partly enters directly the home circulation of money
to make up for worn out coin; partly is dammed up in the different
reservoirs containing hoards of coin, means of payment and world-money;
partly is turned into articles of luxury, while the rest simply forms
a treasure. At an advanced stage of development of the capitalist
system of production the formation of hoards is reduced to the minimum
required by the various processes of circulation for the free play
of their mechanism. The hoard as such becomes idle wealth, unless it
appears as a temporary form of a surplus resulting from a favorable
balance of payments or as the result of an interrupted exchange of
matter, i. e. as the solidification of a commodity in its first
metamorphosis.

Gold and silver, in their capacity of money, being by conception
universal commodities, assume in their capacity of world money the
form adapted to a universal commodity. To the extent to which all
commodities are exchanged for them, they become the transformed
impersonation of all commodities and, therefore, universally alienable
commodities. Their function of serving as the embodiment of universal
labor-time is realized more and more as the interchange of matter
produced by concrete labor embraces increasing parts of the world.
They become universal equivalents to the extent to which the series
of particular equivalents which constitute their spheres of exchange,
increases. Since in the sphere of world circulation commodities unfold
their own exchange value on a universal scale, they assume the form
of world money when transformed into gold and silver. As commodity
owning nations are thus turning gold into money by their diversified
industry and universal trade, industry and trade appear to them only as
a means of getting money out of the world market in the shape of gold
and silver. Gold and silver, as world money, are, therefore, as much
products of the universal circulation of commodities as they are means
of widening its sphere. Like chemistry which grew up behind the backs
of the alchemists who tried to find a way of making gold, so do the
sources of world industry and world trade spring up behind the backs
of the owners of commodities, while they are hunting for the commodity
in its magic form. Gold and silver help to create the world market by
anticipating its existence in their conception of money. That this
magic effect of the precious metals is by no means confined to the
period of infancy of capitalist society but is a necessary outgrowth
of the perverse conception which the representatives of the commodity
world have of their own work in society, is shown by the extraordinary
influence exerted in the middle of the nineteenth century by the
discovery of new gold fields.

Just as money develops into world-money, so the commodity owner
develops into a cosmopolitan. The cosmopolitan relation of men is
originally only a relation of commodity owners. The commodity as such
rises above all religious, political, national, and language barriers.
Price is its universal language and money, its common form. But with
the development of world-money as distinguished from national coin,
there develops the cosmopolitanism of the commodity owner as the faith
of practical reason opposed to traditional, religious, national and
other prejudices which hinder the interchange of matter among mankind.
As the identical gold that lands in England in the form of American
eagles, turns there into sovereigns and three days later circulates in
Paris in the form of Napoleons, only to emerge in Venice in a few weeks
as so many ducats, retaining all the while the same value, it becomes
clear to the commodity owner that nationality “is but the guinea’s
stamp.” The lofty idea which he conceives of the entire world is that
of a market, the _world market_.[111]


4. THE PRECIOUS METALS.

The process of capitalist production first of all takes hold of the
metallic circulation as of a ready, transmitted organ which, though
undergoing a gradual transformation, always retains its fundamental
structure. The question as to why gold and silver and not other
commodities serve as money material falls outside the limits of the
capitalist system. We shall, therefore, confine ourselves to summing
up the most essential points.

Since universal labor-time admits of quantitative differences only,
the object which is to serve as its specific incarnation must be
capable of representing purely quantitative differences, i. e., it
must be homogeneous and uniform in quality throughout. That is the
first condition a commodity must satisfy to perform the function of
a measure of value. If commodities were estimated in oxen, hides,
grain, etc., they would really have to be estimated in an ideal average
ox, or average hide, since there are qualitative differences between
an ox and an ox, grain and grain, hide and hide. On the contrary,
gold and silver, as elementary substances, are always the same,
and equal quantities of them represent, therefore, values of equal
magnitude.[112] The other condition which a commodity that is to serve
as a universal equivalent must satisfy and which follows directly from
its function of representing purely quantitative differences, is that
it must be capable of being divided and re-united at will, so that
money of account may be represented materially as well. Gold and
silver possess these properties to a superior degree.

As mediums of circulation, gold and silver have this advantage over
other commodities, that their high specific gravity which condenses
much weight in little space, corresponds to their economic specific
gravity which condenses relatively much labor-time, i. e. a great
quantity of exchange value in a small volume. This insures facility
of transport, of transition from hand to hand and from one country to
another, the ability to appear as rapidly as to disappear, in short,
that material mobility which constitutes the _sine qua non_ of the
commodity that is to serve as the _perpetuum mobile_ of the process of
circulation.

The high specific value of the precious metals, their durability,
comparative indestructibility, insusceptibility of oxidation through
the action of the air, in the case of gold insolubility in acids
except in aqua regia,―all these natural properties make the precious
metals the natural material for hoarding. Peter Martyr who seems to
have been a great lover of chocolate, remarks, therefore, of the
cacao-bags which formed a species of Mexican gold: “O felicem monetam,
quae suavem utilemque praebet humano generi potum, et a tartarea peste
avaritiae suos immunes servat possessores, quod suffodi aut diu servari
nequeat.”[113]

The great importance of metals in general in the direct process of
production is due to the part they play as instruments of production.
Apart from their scarcity, the great softness of gold and silver as
compared with iron and even copper (in the hardened state in which it
was used by the ancients), makes them unfit for that application and
deprives them, therefore, to a great extent, of that property on which
the use-value of metals is generally based. Useless as they are in the
direct process of production, they are easily dispensed with as means
of existence, as articles of consumption. For that reason any desired
quantity of them may be absorbed by the social process of circulation
without disturbing the processes of direct production and consumption.
Their individual use-value does not come in conflict with their
economic function. Furthermore, gold and silver are not only negatively
superfluous, i. e. dispensable articles, but their aesthetic properties
make them the natural material of luxury, ornamentation, splendor,
festive occasions, in short, the positive form of abundance and wealth.
They appear, in a way, as spontaneous light brought out from the
underground world, since silver reflects all rays of light in their
original combination, and gold only the color of highest intensity,
viz. red light. The sensation of color is, generally speaking, the most
popular form of aesthetic sense. The etymological connection between
the names of the precious metals, and the relations of colors, in the
different Indo-Germanic languages has been established by Jacob Grimm
(see his History of the German Language).

Finally, the susceptibility of gold and silver of being turned from
coin into bullion, from bullion into articles of luxury and vice versa,
i. e. the advantage they possess as against other commodities in not
being tied down to a definite, exclusive form in which they can be
used, makes them the natural material of money, which must constantly
change from one form to another.

Nature no more produces money than it does bankers or discount
rates. But since the capitalist system of production requires the
crystallization of wealth as a fetich in the form of a single article,
gold and silver appear as its appropriate incarnation. Gold and silver
are not money by nature, but money is by nature gold and silver. In the
first place, the silver or gold money crystal is not only the product
of the process of circulation, but in fact its only final product. In
the second place, gold and silver are ready and direct products of
nature, not distinguished by any difference of form. The universal
product of the social process or the social process itself as a product
is a peculiar natural product, a metal hidden in the bowels of the
earth and extracted therefrom.[114]

We have seen that gold and silver are unable to fulfill the
requirements which they are expected to meet in their capacity of
money, viz. to remain values of unvarying magnitude. Still, as
Aristotle had already observed, they possess a more constant value than
the average of other commodities. Apart from the universal effect of an
appreciation or depreciation of the precious metals, the fluctuations
in the ratio between the values of gold and silver has a special
importance, since both serve side by side in the world market as money
material. The purely economic causes of this change of value must be
traced to the change in the labor-time required for the production of
these metals; conquests and other political upheavals which exercised
a great influence on the value of metals in the ancient world, have
nowadays only a local and transitory effect. The labor-time required
for the production of the metals will depend on the degree of their
natural scarcity, as well as on the greater or less difficulty with
which they can be obtained in a purely metallic state. As a matter of
fact, gold is the first metal discovered by man. This is due to the
fact that nature itself furnishes it partly in pure crystalline form,
individualized, free from chemical combination with other substances,
or, as the alchemists used to say, in a virgin state; and so far as
it does not appear in that state, nature does the technical work in
the great gold washeries of rivers. Only the crudest kind of labor is
thus required of man in the extraction of gold, either from rivers or
from alluvial deposits; while the extraction of silver presupposes the
development of mining and a comparatively high degree of technical
skill generally. For that reason the value of silver is originally
greater than that of gold in spite of the lesser absolute scarcity of
the former. Strabo’s assertion that a certain Arabian tribe gave ten
pounds of gold for one pound of iron and two pounds of gold for one
pound of silver, seems by no means incredible. But as the productive
powers of labor in society are developed and the product of unskilled
labor rises in value as compared with the product of skilled labor;
as the earth’s crust is more thoroughly broken up and the original
superficial sources of gold supply give out, the value of silver begins
to fall in proportion to that of gold. At a given stage of development
of engineering and of the means of communication, the discovery of
new gold or silver fields become the decisive factor. In ancient Asia
the ratio of gold to silver was 6 to 1 or 8 to 1; the latter ratio
prevailed in China and Japan as late as the beginning of the nineteenth
century; 10 to 1, the ratio in Xenophon’s time, may be considered as
the average ratio of the middle period of antiquity. The exploitation
of the Spanish silver mines by Carthage and later by Rome had about the
same effect in antiquity, as the discovery of the American mines in
modern Europe. For the period of the Roman empire 15 or 16 to 1 may be
assumed as a rough average, although we frequently find cases of still
greater depreciation of silver in Rome. The same movement beginning
with the relative depreciation of gold and concluding with the fall
in the value of silver, is repeated in the following epoch which has
lasted from the Middle Ages to the present time. As in Xenophon’s times
the average ratio in the Middle Ages was 10 to 1, changing to 16 or
15 to 1 in consequence of the discovery of the American mines. The
discovery of the Australian, Californian and Columbian gold sources
makes a new fall in the value of gold probable.[115]


C. THEORIES OF THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND OF MONEY.

As the universal thirst for gold prompted nations and princes in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the period of infancy of modern
bourgeois society, to crusades beyond the sea in search of the golden
grail,[116] the first interpreters of the modern world, the founders
of the monetary system, of which the mercantile system is but a
variation, proclaimed gold and silver, i. e. money, as the only thing
that constitutes wealth. They were quite right when, from the point
of view of the simple circulation of commodities, they declared that
the mission of bourgeois society was to make money, i. e. to build up
everlasting treasures which neither moth nor rust could eat. It is
no argument with the monetary system to say that a ton of iron whose
price is £3 constitutes a value of the same magnitude as £3 worth
of gold. The point here is not the magnitude of the exchange value,
but as to what constitutes its adequate form. If the monetary and
mercantile systems single out international trade and the particular
branches of national industry directly connected with that trade as
the only true sources of wealth or money, it must be borne in mind,
that in that period the greater part of national production was still
carried on under forms of feudalism and was the source from which
producers drew directly their means of subsistence. Products, as a
rule, were not turned into commodities nor, therefore, into money;
they did not enter into the general social interchange of matter; did
not, therefore, appear as embodiments of universal abstract labor;
and did not, in fact, constitute bourgeois wealth. Money as the end
and object of circulation is exchange value or abstract wealth, but
it is no material element of wealth and does not form the directing
goal and impelling motive of production. True to the conditions as
they prevailed in that primitive stage of bourgeois production, those
unrecognized prophets held fast to the pure, tangible, and resplendent
form of exchange value, to its form of a universal commodity as against
all special commodities. The proper bourgeois economic sphere of that
period was the sphere of the circulation of commodities. Hence, they
judged the entire complex process of bourgeois production from the
point of view of that elementary sphere and confounded money with
capital. The unceasing war of modern economists against the monetary
and mercantile system is mostly due to the fact that this system blabs
out in brutally naive fashion, the secret of bourgeois production, viz.
its subjection to the domination of exchange value. Ricardo, though
wrong in the application he makes of it, remarks somewhere that even in
times of famine, grain is imported not because the nation is starving,
but because the grain dealer is making money. In its criticism of the
monetary and mercantile system, political economy, by attacking that
system as a mere illusion and as a false theory, fails to recognize in
it the barbaric form of its own fundamental principles. Furthermore,
this system has not only an historic justification, but within
certain spheres of modern economy retains until now the full rights
of citizenship. At all stages of the bourgeois system of production
in which wealth assumes the elementary form of a commodity, exchange
value assumes the elementary form of money and in all phases of the
process of production wealth reassumes for a moment the universal
elementary commodity form. Even at the most advanced stage of bourgeois
economy, the specific functions of gold and silver to serve as money,
in contradistinction to their function of mediums of circulation―a
function which distinguishes them from all other commodities―is not
done away with, but only limited, hence the monetary and mercantile
system retains its right of citizenship. The Catholic fact that gold
and silver are contrasted with other profane commodities as the direct
incarnation of social labor, that is as the expression of abstract
wealth, naturally offends the Protestant point d’honneur of bourgeois
economy, and out of fear of the prejudices of the monetary system
it had lost for a long time its grasp of the phenomena of money
circulation, as will be shown presently.

It was quite natural that, contrary to the monetary and mercantile
system which knew money only in its form of a crystallized product
of circulation, classical political economy should have conceived
money first of all in its fluent form of exchange value arising and
disappearing within the process of the metamorphosis of commodities.
And since the circulation of commodities is regarded exclusively in the
form of  and the latter in its turn, exclusively in its aspect of
a dynamic unity of sale and purchase, money comes to be regarded in
its capacity of a medium of circulation as opposed to its capacity of
money. And when that medium of circulation is isolated in its function
of coin, it turns, as we have seen, into a token of value. But since
classical political economy had to deal with metallic circulation as
the prevailing form of circulation, it defined metallic money as coin,
and metallic coin as a mere token of value. In accordance with the
law governing the circulation of tokens of value, the proposition was
advanced that the prices of commodities depend on the quantity of money
in circulation instead of the opposite principle that the quantity of
money in circulation depends on the prices of commodities. We find
this view more or less clearly expressed by the Italian economists of
the seventeenth century; LOCKE now asserts, now denies that principle;
it is clearly elaborated in the “Spectator” (of October 19, 1711)
by MONTESQUIEU AND HUME. Since Hume was by far the most important
representative of this theory in the eighteenth century, we shall
commence our review with him.

Under certain assumptions, an increase or decrease in the quantity
either of the metallic money in circulation, or of the tokens of value
in circulation seems to affect _uniformly_ the prices of commodities.
With each fall or rise of the _value_ of gold or silver in which the
exchange values of commodities are estimated as prices, there is a rise
or fall of prices, because of the change in their measure of value; as
a result of the rise or fall of prices, a greater or smaller quantity
of gold and silver is circulating as coin. But the apparent phenomenon
is the fall in prices―the exchange value of commodities remaining the
same―accompanied by an increased or diminished quantity of the medium
of circulation. On the other hand, if the quantity of tokens of value
rises above or falls below its required level, it is forcibly reduced
to the latter by a fall or rise of prices. In either case the same
effect seems to be brought about by the same cause, and Hume holds fast
to this semblance.

Every scientific inquiry into the relation between the volume of the
circulating medium and the movement of prices must assume the value
of the money material as given. Hume, on the contrary, considers
exclusively periods of revolution in the value of the precious metals,
i. e. revolutions in the measure of value. The rise of prices which
occurred simultaneously with the increase of metallic money after the
discovery of the American mines forms the historical background of his
theory, while his polemic against the monetary and mercantile system
furnishes its practical motive. The importation of precious metals can
naturally increase while their cost of production remains the same.
On the other hand, a decrease in their value, i. e. in the labor-time
required for their production will reveal itself first of all in
their increased imports. Hence, said the later followers of Hume, a
decrease in the value of the precious metals, reveals itself in an
increased volume of the circulating medium, and the increased volume
of the latter is shown in the rise of prices. As a matter of fact,
however, the rise in price affects only exported commodities, which
are exchanged for gold and silver as commodities and not as mediums
of circulation. Thus, the prices of these commodities, which are now
estimated in gold and silver of lower value, rise as compared with
the prices of all other commodities whose exchange value continues
to be estimated in gold or silver according to the standard of their
old cost of production. This twofold appraisement of the exchange
values of commodities in the same country can naturally be only
temporary, and the gold and silver prices must become equalized in
the proportions determined by the exchange values themselves, so that
finally the exchange values of all commodities come to be estimated
according to the new value of the money material. The development of
this process, as well as the ways and means in which the exchange value
of commodities asserts itself within the limits of the fluctuations
of market prices, do not fall within the scope of this work. But that
this equalization takes place but gradually in the early periods of
development of bourgeois production and extends over long periods of
time, never keeping pace with the increase of cash in circulation,
has been strikingly demonstrated by new critical investigations of
the movement of prices of commodities in the sixteenth century.[117]
The favorite references of Hume’s followers to the rise of prices
in ancient Rome in consequence of the conquests of Macedonia, Egypt
and Asia Minor, are quite irrelevant. The characteristic method of
antiquity of suddenly transferring hoarded treasures from one country
to another, which was accomplished by violence and thus brought about
a temporary reduction of the cost of production of precious metals
in a certain country by the simple process of plunder, affects just
as little the intrinsic laws of money circulation, as the gratuitous
distribution of Egyptian and Sicilian grain in Rome affected the
universal law governing the price of grain. Hume, as well as all
other writers of the eighteenth century, was not in possession of the
material necessary for the detailed observation of the circulation
of money. This material, which first becomes available with the full
development of banking, includes in the first place a critical history
of prices of commodities, and in the second, official and current
statistics relating to the expansion and contraction of the circulating
medium, the imports and exports of the precious metals, etc. Hume’s
theory of circulation may be summed up in the following propositions:
1. The prices of commodities in a country are determined by the
quantity of money existing there (real or symbolic money); 2. The
money current in a country represents all the commodities to be found
there. In proportion “as there is more or less of this representation,”
i. e. of money, “there goes a greater or less quantity of the thing
represented to the same quantity of it”; 3. If commodities increase
in quantity, their price falls or the value of money rises. If money
increases in quantity, then, on the contrary, the price of commodities
rises and the value of money declines.[118]

“The dearness of everything,” says Hume, “from plenty of money, is a
disadvantage, which attends an established commerce, and sets bounds
to it in every country, by enabling the poorer states to undersell
the richer in all foreign markets.”[119] “Where coin is in greater
plenty; as a greater quantity of it is required to represent the same
quantity of goods; it can have no effect, either good or bad, taking
a nation within itself; any more than it would make an alteration on
a merchant’s books, if, instead of the Arabian method of notation,
which requires few characters, he should make use of the Roman, which
requires a great many. Nay, the greater quantity of money, like the
Roman characters, is rather inconvenient, and requires greater trouble
both to keep and transport it.”[120] In order to prove anything, Hume
should have shown that under a _given_ system of notation the quantity
of characters used does not depend on the magnitude of the numbers,
but that on the contrary, the magnitude of the numbers depends on
the quantity of the characters used. It is perfectly true that there
is no advantage in estimating or “counting” values of commodities
in depreciated gold and silver, and that is the reason why nations
have always found it more convenient with the growth of the value
of the commodities in circulation to count in silver in preference
to copper, and in gold rather than in silver. In proportion as the
nations became richer, they converted the less valuable metals into
subsidiary coin and the more valuable ones into money. Furthermore,
Hume forgets that in order to count values in gold and silver, it is
not necessary that either gold or silver should be “on hand.” Money of
account and the medium of circulation are identical with him and both
are “coin.” Hume concludes that a rise or fall of prices depends on
the quantity of money in circulation, because a change in the value
of the measure of value, i. e. of the precious metals which serve as
money of account, causes a rise or fall of prices and, consequently,
also a change in the amount of money in circulation, the rapidity of
the latter remaining the same. That not only the quantity of gold and
silver increased in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but that
the cost of their production had declined at the same time, Hume could
know from the closing up of the European mines. In the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries the prices of commodities increased in Europe
with the influx of the mass of American gold and silver; hence the
prices of commodities in every land are determined by the mass of
gold and silver to be found there. This was Hume’s first “necessary
consequence.”[121] In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries prices
had not risen uniformly with the increase of the quantity of precious
metals; more than half a century passed before _any_ change in
prices became perceptible, and even then it took a long time before
the exchange values of commodities came to be generally estimated
according to the depreciated value of gold and silver, i. e. before the
revolution affected the general price level. Hence, concludes Hume,
who, quite contrary to the principles of his philosophy, generalizes
indiscriminately from imperfectly observed facts, prices of commodities
or the value of money depend not on the total amount of money to be
found in the country, but rather on the quantity of gold and silver
which is actually in circulation; but in the long run all the gold
and silver in the country must be absorbed by circulation in the
form of coin.[122] It is clear that if gold and silver have a value
of their own, then, apart from all other laws of circulation, only a
definite quantity of gold and silver can circulate as the equivalent
of commodities of a given value. If, therefore, every quantity of gold
and silver which happens to be in a country must enter the sphere of
exchange of commodities as a medium of circulation without regard
to the total value of the commodities, then gold and silver have no
intrinsic value and are in fact no real commodities. That is Hume’s
third “necessary consequence.” He makes commodities enter the process
of circulation without price and gold and silver without value. That
is the reason why he never speaks of the value of commodities and of
gold, but only of their relative quantities. Locke had already said
that gold and silver had merely an imaginary or conventional value; the
first brutal expression of opposition to the assertion of the monetary
“system” that gold and silver alone have true value. That gold and
silver owe their character of money to the function they perform in
the social process of exchange is interpreted to the effect that they
owe their own value and therefore the magnitude of their value to a
social function.[123] Gold and silver are thus worthless things, which,
however, acquire a fictitious value within the sphere of circulation
_as representatives of commodities_. They are converted by the process
of circulation not into money, but into value. This value of theirs is
determined by the proportion between their own volume and that of the
commodities, since the two must balance each other. Thus, Hume makes
gold and silver enter the world of commodities as non-commodities;
but as soon as they appear in the form of coin, he turns them, on
the contrary, into mere commodities, which must be exchanged for
other commodities by simple barter. In that manner, if the world of
commodities consisted of but one commodity, say one million quarters
of grain, the idea would work itself out very simply; viz., one
quarter of grain would be exchanged for two ounces of gold if there
were altogether two million ounces of gold, and for twenty ounces of
gold, if there were a total of twenty million ounces, the price of the
commodity and the value of money rising or falling in inverse ratio to
the quantity of gold in existence.[124] But the world of commodities
consists of an endless variety of use-values, whose relative values are
by no means determined by their relative quantities. How, then, does
Hume conceive this exchange of the volume of commodities for the volume
of gold? He contents himself with the meaningless, hollow idea that
every commodity is exchanged as an aliquot part of the entire volume of
commodities for a corresponding aliquot part of the volume of gold. The
process of the movement of commodities due to the antagonism between
exchange value and use-value which commodities bear within themselves,
and which manifests itself in the circulation of money, becoming
crystallized in different forms of the latter, is thus done away with,
giving place to the imaginary mechanical equalization process between
the quantity of precious metals to be found in a country and the volume
of commodities existing there at the same time.

SIR JAMES STEUART opens his inquiry into the nature of coin and
money with an elaborate criticism of Hume and Montesquieu.[125] He
is really the first to ask this question: is the quantity of current
money determined by the prices of commodities, or are the prices of
commodities determined by the quantity of current money? Although his
analysis is obscured by his fantastic conception of the measure of
value, his vacillating view of exchange value and by reminiscences
of the mercantile system, he discovers the essential forms of money
and the general laws of the circulation of money, because he makes
no attempt at a mechanical separation of commodities from money, but
proceeds to develop its different functions from the different aspects
of the exchange of commodities. Money is used, he says, for two
principal purposes: for the payment of debts and for the purchase of
what one needs; the two together form “ready money demands.” The state
of trade and industry, the mode of living, the customary expenditures
of the people, taken all together regulate and determine the volume
of “ready money demands,” i. e. the number of “alienations.” In order
to effect this multitude of payments, a certain proportion of money
is required. This proportion may increase or decrease according to
circumstances, even while the number of alienations remains the same.
At any rate, the circulation of a country can absorb only a definite
quantity of money.[126] “It is the complicated operations of demand
and competition which determines the standard price of everything”;
the latter “does not in the least depend on the quantity of gold and
silver in the country.”[127] What then will become of the gold and
silver that is not required as coin? They are hoarded or used in the
manufacture of articles of luxury. If the quantity of gold and silver
fall below the level required for circulation, symbolic money or other
substitutes take its place. If a favorable rate of exchange brings
about a surplus of money in the country and cuts off at the same time
the demand for its shipment abroad, it will accumulate in strong-boxes,
where the “riches will remain without producing more effect than if
they had remained in the mine.”

The second law discovered by Steuart is that of the reflux of credit
circulation to its starting point. Finally, he works out the effects
which the disparity of the rates of interest in different countries
produces upon the international export and import of precious
metals. The last two points we mention here only for the sake of
completeness, since they have but a remote bearing on the subject of
our discussion.[128] Symbolic money or credit money―Steuart does not
as yet distinguish between the two forms of money―may take the place
of precious metals as a means of purchase or means of payment in the
sphere of home circulation, but never in the world market. Paper notes
are therefore “money of the society,” while gold and silver are “money
of the world.”[129]

It is characteristic of nations with an “historical” development, in
the sense in which the term is used by the historical school of law,
to keep forgetting their own history. Although the controversy as to
the relation of prices of commodities to the volume of the circulating
medium has been continually agitating Parliament for the last half a
century, and has precipitated in England thousands of pamphlets, large
and small, Steuart has remained even more of a “dead dog” than Spinoza
seemed to be to Moses Mendelson in Lessing’s time. Even the latest
writer on the history of “currency,” Maclaren, makes Adam Smith the
original author of Steuart’s theory, and Ricardo of Hume’s theory.[130]
While Ricardo elaborated Hume’s theory, Adam Smith registered the
results of Steuart’s investigations as dead facts. Adam Smith applied
the Scotch saying that “mony mickles mak a muckle” even to his
spiritual wealth, and therefore concealed with petty care the sources
to which he owed the little out of which he tried to make so much.
More than once he prefers to break off the point of the discussion,
whenever he feels that an attempt on his part clearly to formulate the
question would compel him to settle his accounts with his predecessors.
So in the case of the money theory. He tacitly adopts Steuart’s theory
when he says that the gold and silver existing in a country is partly
utilized as coin; partly accumulated in the form of reserve funds for
merchants in countries without banks, or of bank reserves in countries
with a credit currency; partly serves as a hoard for the settling of
international payments; partly is turned into articles of luxury. He
passes over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in
circulation, treating money quite wrongly as a mere commodity.[131]
His vulgarizer, the dull J. B. Say, whom the French have proclaimed
_prince de la science_―like Johann Christoph Gottsched, who proclaimed
his Schönaich a Homer and himself a Pietro Aretino to the _terror
principum and lux mundi_―has with great pomp raised this not altogether
innocent oversight of Adam Smith to a dogma.[132] It must be said,
however, that his hostile attitude to the illusions of the mercantile
system prevented Adam Smith from taking an objective view of the
phenomena of metallic circulation, while his views on credit money are
original and deep. As in the eighteenth century petrification theories
there is always felt the presence of an undercurrent which springs from
either a critical or apologetic attitude toward the biblical tradition
of the flood, so there is concealed behind all the money theories of
the eighteenth century a secret struggle with the monetary system, the
ghost which had stood guard over the cradle of bourgeois economy and
continued to throw its shadow over legislation.

In the nineteenth century, inquiries into the nature of money were not
prompted directly by phenomena of metallic circulation, but rather by
those of bank-note circulation. The former was touched upon only in
order to discover the laws governing the latter. The suspension of
specie payments by the Bank of England in 1797, the rise of prices of
many commodities which followed it, the fall of the mint price of gold
below its market price, the depreciation of bank-notes, especially
since 1809, furnished the direct practical occasion for a party
struggle in parliament and a theoretical tournament outside of it,
both conducted with like passion. The historical background for the
controversy was furnished by the history of paper money during the
eighteenth century: the fiasco of Law’s bank; the depreciation of the
provincial bank-notes of the English Colonies in North America from the
beginning to the middle of the eighteenth century which went hand in
hand with the increase in the number of tokens of value; further, the
Continental bills issued as legal tender by the American government
during the War of Independence; and finally, the experiment with the
French _assignats_ carried out on a still larger scale. Most of the
English writers of that period confound the circulation of bank-notes,
which is governed by quite different laws, with the circulation of
tokens of value or government legal tender paper money; and while they
claim to explain the phenomena of this legal tender circulation by the
laws of metallic circulation, they proceed, as a matter of fact, just
the opposite way, viz., deducting laws for the latter from phenomena
observed in connection with the former. We omit all the numerous
writers of the period of 1800-1809 and turn directly to RICARDO, both
because he embodies the views of his predecessors, which he formulates
with greater precision, and because the shape he gave to the theory of
money governs English bank legislation until this moment. Ricardo, like
his predecessors, confounds the circulation of bank-notes, or credit
money, with the circulation of mere tokens of value. The fact which
impresses him most is the depreciation of paper currency accompanied by
the rise of prices of commodities. What the American mines had been to
Hume, the paper-bill presses in Threadneedle street were to Ricardo,
and he himself expressly identifies the two factors at some place in
his works. His first writings, which dealt exclusively with the money
question belong to the time of the most violent controversy between
the Bank of England, which had on its side the ministers and the war
party, and its opponents about whom were centered the parliamentary
opposition, the Whigs and the Peace party. They appeared as immediate
forerunners of the famous Report of the Bullion Committee of 1810, in
which Ricardo’s views were adopted.[133] The singular circumstance,
that Ricardo and his adherents, who held money to be merely a token
of value, are called bullionists, is due not only to the name of that
committee, but also to the nature of their theory. In his work on
political economy, Ricardo repeated and developed further the same
views, but nowhere has he investigated the nature of money as such, as
he had done in the case of exchange value, profit, rent, etc.

To begin with, Ricardo determines the value of gold and silver, like
that of all other commodities, by the quantity of labor-time embodied
in them.[134] By means of them, as commodities of a given value, the
values of all other commodities are measured.[135] The volume of the
circulating medium in a country is determined by the value of the
unit of measure of money on the one hand, and by the sum total of
the exchange values of commodities, on the other. This quantity is
modified by economy in the method of payment.[136] Since the quantity
of money, of a given value, which can be absorbed by circulation,
is thus determined and since the value of money within the sphere of
circulation manifests itself only in its quantity, it follows that
mere tokens of value, if issued in proportions determined by the value
of money, may replace it in circulation, and in fact, “a currency is
in its most perfect state when it consists wholly of paper money, but
of paper money of an equal value with the gold which it professes
to represent.”[137] So far Ricardo determines the volume of the
circulating medium by the prices of commodities, assuming the value of
money to be given; money as a token of value means with him a token of
a definite quantity of gold and not a mere worthless representative of
commodities as was the case with Hume.

When Ricardo suddenly gets off the straight path of his presentation
and takes the very opposite view, he does so to turn his attention
to the international circulation of precious metals and thus brings
confusion into the problem by introducing considerations that are
foreign to the subject. Let us follow his own course of reasoning, and,
in order to remove everything that is artificial and incidental, let
us assume that the gold and silver mines are located in the interior
of the countries in which the precious metals circulate as money.
The only inference which follows from Ricardo’s reasoning as so far
developed, is that, the value of gold being given, the quantity of
money in circulation will be determined by the prices of commodities.
Thus, at a given moment, the quantity of gold in circulation in a
country is simply determined by the exchange value of the commodities
in circulation. Let us suppose now that the sum total of these exchange
values has declined either because there are less commodities produced
at the old exchange values, or because, in consequence of an increased
productivity of labor, the same quantity of commodities has a smaller
value. Or, we may assume on the contrary that the sum total of exchange
values has increased, either because the quantity of commodities
has increased while the cost of their production has remained the
same, or because the value of the same or of a smaller quantity of
commodities has risen in consequence of a diminished productivity of
labor. What becomes in either case of the _given_ quantity of metal
in circulation? If gold is money merely because it is current as a
medium of circulation; if it is compelled to remain in circulation
like government legal tender paper money (and that is what Ricardo has
in mind), then the quantity of money in circulation will rise above
the normal level, as determined by the exchange value of the metal,
in the former case, and fall below that level in the latter. Although
possessing a value of its own, gold will become in the former case
a token of a metal of lower exchange value than its own, and in the
latter, a token of a metal of higher value. In the former case it will
remain as a token of value less than its own, in the latter greater
than its own (again an abstract deduction from legal tender paper
money). In the former case it is the same as though commodities were
estimated in a metal of lower value than gold, in the latter, as though
they were estimated in a metal of higher value. In the former case,
prices of commodities would rise therefore, in the latter they would
fall. In either case the movement of prices, their rise or fall, would
appear as the effect of a relative expansion or contraction of the
volume of gold in circulation above or below the level corresponding
to its own value, i. e. above or below the normal quantity which is
determined by the proportion between its own value and that of the
commodities in circulation.

The same process would take place if the sum total of the prices of
the commodities in circulation remained unchanged, while the volume
of gold in circulation came to be below or above the right level: the
former in case the gold coin worn out in the course of circulation
were not replaced by the production of a corresponding quantity of
gold in the mines; the latter, if the output of the mines exceeded the
requirements of circulation. In either case it is assumed that the cost
of production of gold or its value remain the same.

To sum up: the money in circulation is at its normal level, when its
volume is determined by its own bullion value, the exchange value of
commodities being given. It rises above that level, bringing about a
fall in the value of gold below its own bullion value and a rise of
prices of commodities, whenever the sum total of the exchange values of
commodities declines, or the output of gold from the mines increases.
It sinks below its right level, leading to a rise of gold above its
own bullion value and to a fall of prices of commodities, whenever the
sum total of the exchange values of the commodities or the gold output
of the mines is not sufficient to replace the quantity of outworn
gold. In either case the gold in circulation becomes a token of value
greater or smaller than that it really possesses. It may become an
appreciated or depreciated token of itself. As soon as all commodities
would come to be estimated in gold of this new value and the general
price level would accordingly rise or fall, the quantity of current
gold would again answer the requirements of circulation (a consequence
which Ricardo emphasizes with great pleasure), but would be at variance
with the cost of production of the precious metals and, therefore,
with their relation as commodities to all other commodities. According
to the general Ricardian theory of exchange value, the rise of gold
above its exchange value, i. e., above the value as determined by the
labor-time contained in it, would cause an increase in the production
of gold until the increased output of it would reduce its value to
the proper magnitude. And in the same manner, a fall of gold below
its value would cause a decline in its production until its value
rose again to its proper magnitude. By these opposite movements the
discrepancy between the bullion value of gold and its value as a medium
of circulation would disappear, the normal level of the volume of gold
in circulation would be restored, and the price level would again
correspond to the measure of value. These fluctuations in the value of
gold in circulation would to the same extent affect gold in the form
of bullion, because by assumption, all gold that is not utilized as an
article of luxury, is supposed to be in circulation. Since gold itself
may become, both as coin and bullion, a token of value of greater
or smaller magnitude than its bullion value, it is self understood
that convertible bank-notes in circulation have to share the same
fate. Although bank-notes are convertible, i. e. their real value and
nominal value agree, “the aggregate currency consisting of metal and of
convertible notes” may appreciate or depreciate according as to whether
it rises or falls, for reasons already stated, above or below the level
determined by the exchange value of the commodities in circulation
and the bullion value of gold. Inconvertible paper money, has, from
this point of view, only that advantage as against convertible paper
money, that it may depreciate in a twofold manner. It may fall below
the value of the metal which it is supposed to represent, because it
has been issued in too great quantity, or it may depreciate because
the metal it represents has itself fallen in value. This depreciation,
not of paper as compared with gold, but of gold and paper together,
or of the aggregate currency of a country, is one of the principal
discoveries of Ricardo, which Lord Overstone and Co. pressed into their
service and made a fundamental principle of Sir Robert Peele’s Bank
legislation of 1844 and 1845.

What should have been proven was that the price of commodities or the
value of gold depends on the quantity of gold in circulation. The
proof consists in the assumption of what is to be proven, viz. that
any quantity of the precious metal employed as money must become a
medium of circulation or coin, and thereby a token of value for the
commodities in circulation, no matter in what proportion to its own
intrinsic value and no matter what the total value of those commodities
may be. To put it differently, the proof consists in overlooking all
the other functions which money performs besides its function of a
medium of circulation. When hard pressed, as in his controversy with
Bosanquet, Ricardo, completely under the influence of the phenomenon of
depreciated tokens of value caused by their quality, takes recourse to
dogmatic assurances.[138]

If Ricardo had built up this theory by abstract reasoning, as we
have done it here, without introducing concrete facts and incidental
matters which only distract his attention from the main question, its
hollowness would be striking. But he takes up the entire subject in its
_international_ aspect. It will be easy to prove, however, that the
apparent magnitude of scale does not make his fundamental ideas less
diminutive.

His first proposition was as follows: the volume of metallic currency
is normal when it is determined by the total value of the commodities
in circulation estimated in its bullion value. Expressed so as to
apply to international conditions, it reads thus: in a normal state of
circulation every country possesses a quantity of money “according to
the state of its commerce and wealth.” Money circulates at a value
corresponding to its real value or to its cost of production, i. e.
it has the same value _in all countries_.[139] That being the case,
“there could be no temptation offered to either for their importation
or exportation.”[140] There would thus be established a balance of
currencies between the different countries. The normal level of a
national currency is now expressed in terms of an international
balance of currencies, which practically amounts to the statement that
nationality does not change anything in a universal economic law. We
have reached again the same fatal point as before. How is the normal
level disturbed? Or, speaking in terms of the new terminology, how is
the international balance of currencies disturbed? Or, how does money
cease to have the same value in all countries? Or, finally, how does
it cease to pass at its own value in every country? We have seen that
the normal level was disturbed by an increase or decrease of the volume
of money in circulation while the total value of commodities remained
the same; or, because the quantity of money in circulation remained
the same while the exchange values of commodities rose or fell. In the
same manner, the international level, determined by the value of the
metal itself, is disturbed by an increase in the quantity of gold in a
country brought about by the discovery of new gold mines,[141] or by
an increase or decrease of the total exchange-value of the circulating
commodities in any particular country. Just as in the former case the
output of the precious metals decreased or increased according as
to whether it was necessary to contract or expand the currency and
thereby to lower or raise prices, so are the same effects produced
now by export and import from one country to another. In the country
in which prices would rise or the value of gold would fall below the
bullion value in consequence of a redundant currency, gold would be
depreciated, and the prices of commodities would rise as compared with
other countries. Gold would, therefore, be exported, while commodities
would be imported, and vice versa. Just as in the former case the
output of gold, so now the import or export of gold and, with it, the
rise or fall of prices of commodities would continue until, as we would
have said before, the right value relation would be restored between
the metal and commodities, or as we shall say now, the international
balance of currencies would be restored. Just as in the former case
the production of gold increased or decreased because gold stood
above or below its value, so now the international migration of gold
would take place for the same reason. Just as in the former case,
every change in the production of the circulating metal affected its
quantity and, thereby, prices, so would the same effect be produced
now by international import and export. As soon as the relative values
of gold and commodities or the normal quantity of currency would be
restored, no further production would take place in the former case,
and no further export or import in the latter, except in so far as
would be necessary to replace outworn coin and to meet the demand of
manufacturers of articles of luxury. It follows “that the temptation to
export money in exchange for goods, or what is termed an unfavorable
balance of trade, never arises but from a redundant currency.”[142]
“The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not
the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance.”[143] Since the
increase or decrease in the production of gold in the former case and
the importation or exportation of gold in the latter, take place only
whenever its volume rises above or sinks below its normal level, i.
e. whenever gold appreciates or depreciates in comparison with its
bullion value, or whenever prices of commodities are too high or too
low; it follows that every such movement works as a corrective,[144]
since, through the resultant expansion or contraction of the currency,
prices are restored to their true level: in the former case this level
represents the balance between the respective values of gold and of
commodities; in the latter, the international balance of currencies. To
put it in other words: money circulates in different countries only in
so far as it circulates as coin in every country. Money is but coin and
all the gold existing in a country must therefore enter circulation,
i. e. it can rise above or fall below its value as a token of value.
Thus we safely land again, by the round-about way of this international
complication, at the simple dogma which constituted our starting point.

With what violence to actual facts Ricardo has to explain them in
the sense of his abstract theory, a few illustrations will suffice
to show. He maintains, e. g. that in years of poor crops, which
happened frequently in England during 1800-1820, gold is exported not
because corn is needed and gold as money is at all times an effectual
means of purchase in the world market, but because gold is in such
cases depreciated in its value as compared with other commodities
and, therefore, the currency of the country in which there has been
a failure of crops is depreciated with respect to other national
currencies. “In consequence of a bad harvest, a country having been
deprived of a part of its commodities ... the currency which was
before at its just level ... become(s) redundant,” and prices of all
commodities rise in consequence.[145] Contrary to this paradoxical
interpretation it has been proven statistically that from 1793 to
the present time, whenever England had a bad harvest the available
supply of currency not only did not become superabundant, but became
inadequate and that, therefore, more money circulated and had to
circulate on such occasions.[146]

In the same manner, Ricardo maintained, with reference to Napoleon’s
Continental System and the English Blockade Decree, that the English
exported gold instead of commodities to the Continent, because their
money was depreciated with respect to the money on the Continent, that
their commodities were, therefore, more high priced, which made it
a more profitable commercial speculation to export gold than goods.
According to him England was a market in which commodities were dear
and money was cheap, while on the Continent commodities were cheap
and money was dear. The trouble, according to an English writer, was
“the ruinously low prices of our manufactures and of our colonial
productions under the operation ... of the ‘Continental System’ during
the last six years of the war.... The prices of sugar and coffee,
for instance, on the Continent, computed in gold, were four or five
times higher than their prices in England, computed in bank-notes. I
am speaking ... of the times in which the French chemists discovered
sugar in beet-root, and a substitute for coffee in chicory; and when
the English grazier tried experiments upon fattening oxen with treacle
and molasses―of the times when we took possession of the island of
Heligoland, in order to form there a depot of goods to facilitate, if
possible, the smuggling of them into the north of Europe; and when
the lighter descriptions of British manufactures found their way into
Germany through Turkey.... Almost all the merchandise of the world
accumulated in our warehouses, where they became impounded, except when
some small quantity was released by a French License, for which the
merchants at Hamburgh and Amsterdam had, perhaps, given Napoleon such
a sum as forty or fifty thousand pounds. They must have been strange
merchants ... to have paid so large a sum for liberty to carry a cargo
of goods from a dear market to a cheap one. What was the ostensible
alternative the merchant had?... Either to buy coffee at 6d. a pound
in bank-notes, and send it to a place where it would instantly sell at
3s. or 4s. a pound in gold, or to buy gold with bank-notes at £5 an
ounce, and send it to a place where it would be received at £3 17s.
10-1/2d. an ounce.... It is too absurd, of course, to say ... that the
gold was remitted instead of the coffee, as a preferable mercantile
operation.... There was not a country in the world in which so large a
quantity of desirable goods could be obtained, in return for an ounce
of gold, as in England.... Bonaparte ... was constantly examining the
English Price Current.... So long as he saw that gold was dear and
coffee was cheap in England, he was satisfied that his ‘Continental
System’ worked well.”[147]

At the very time when Ricardo first formulated his theory of money,
and the Bullion Committee embodied it in its parliamentary report,
namely in 1810, a ruinous fall of prices of all English commodities
as compared with those of 1808 and 1809 took place, while gold rose
in value accordingly. Only agricultural products formed an exception,
because their importation from abroad met with obstacles and their
domestic supply was decimated by unfavorable crop conditions.[148]
Ricardo so utterly failed to comprehend the rôle of precious metals as
an international means of payment, that in his testimony before the
Committee of the House of Lords in 1819 he could say “that drains for
exportation would cease altogether so soon as cash payments should be
resumed, and the currency be restored to its metallic level.” He died
just in time, on the very eve of the crisis of 1825, which belied his
prophesies.

The time when Ricardo wrote was generally little adapted for the
observation of the function of precious metals as world money. Before
the introduction of the Continental System, the balance of trade
had almost always been in favor of England, and while that system
lasted, the commercial intercourse with the European continent was
too insignificant to affect the English rate of exchange. The money
transmissions were mostly of a political nature and Ricardo seems to
have utterly failed to grasp the part which subsidy payments played at
that time in English gold exports.[149]

Among the contemporaries of Ricardo who formed the school which
adopted his economic principles, JAMES MILL was the most important
one. He attempted to work out Ricardo’s theory of money on the basis
of simple metallic circulation, without the irrelevant international
complications which served Ricardo to hide the inadequacy of his
theory, and without any controversial regard for the operations of the
Bank of England. His main arguments are as follows:

“By value of money, is here to be understood the proportion in which
it exchanges for other commodities, or the quantity of it which
exchanges for a certain quantity of other things.... It is the total
quantity of the money in any country, which determines what portion of
that quantity shall exchange for a certain portion of the goods or
commodities of that country. If we suppose that all the goods of the
country are on one side, all the money on the other, and that they are
exchanged at once against one another, it is evident ... that the value
of money would depend wholly upon the quantity of it. It will appear
that the case is precisely the same in the actual state of the facts.
The whole of the goods of a country are not exchanged at once against
the whole of the money; the goods are exchanged in portions, often
in very small portions, and at different times, during the course of
the whole year. The same piece of money which is paid in one exchange
to-day, may be paid in another exchange tomorrow. Some of the pieces
will be employed in a great many exchanges, some in very few, and
some, which happen to be hoarded, in none at all. There will, amid all
these varieties, be a certain average number of exchanges, the same
which, if all the pieces had performed an equal number, would have been
performed by each; that average we may suppose to be any number we
please; say, for example, ten. If each of the pieces of the money in
the country perform ten purchases, that is exactly the same thing as if
all the pieces were multiplied by ten, and performed only one purchase
each. The value of all the goods in the country is equal to ten times
the value of all the money.... If the quantity of money instead of
performing ten exchanges in the year, were ten times as great, and
performed only one exchange in the year, it is evident that whatever
addition were made to the whole quantity, would produce a proportional
diminution of value, in each of the minor quantities taken separately.
As the quantity of goods, against which the money is all exchanged at
once, is supposed to be the same, the value of all the money is no
more, after the quantity is augmented, than before it was augmented.
If it is supposed to be augmented one-tenth, the value of every part,
that of an ounce for example, must be diminished one-tenth.... In
whatever degree, therefore, the quantity of money is increased or
diminished, other things remaining the same, in that same proportion,
the value of the whole, and of every part, is reciprocally diminished
or increased. This, it is evident, is a proposition universally true.
Whenever the value of money has either risen or fallen (the quantity
of goods against which it is exchanged and the rapidity of circulation
remaining the same), the change must be owing to a corresponding
diminution or increase of the quantity; and can be owing to nothing
else. If the quantity of goods diminish, while the quantity of money
remains the same, it is the same thing as if the quantity of money
had been increased;” and vice versa.... “Similar changes are produced
by any alteration in the rapidity of circulation.... An increase in
the number of these purchases has the same effect as an increase in
the quantity of money; a diminution the reverse.... If there is any
portion of the annual produce which is not exchanged at all, as what
is consumed by the producer; or which is not exchanged for money;
that is not taken into the account, because what is not exchanged for
money is in the same state with respect to the money, as if it did not
exist.... Whenever the coining of money ... is free, its quantity is
regulated by the value of the metal.... Gold and silver are in reality
commodities.... It is cost of production ... which determines the value
of these, as of other ordinary productions.”[150]

The whole wisdom of Mill resolves itself into a series of arbitrary and
absurd assumptions. He wishes to prove that the price of commodities or
the value of money is determined by “the total quantity of the money
in any country.” _Assuming_ that the quantity and the exchange value
of the commodities in circulation remain unchanged and that the same
be true of the rapidity of circulation and of the value of precious
metals as determined by the cost of production, and _assuming_ at
the same time that the quantity of the metallic currency increases
or decreases in proportion to the quantity of money _existing_ in a
country, it becomes really “evident” that what was to have been proven
has been assumed. Mill falls, moreover, into the same error as Hume
by assuming that use-values and not commodities with a given exchange
value are in circulation, and that vitiates his statement, even if we
grant all of his “assumptions.” The rapidity of circulation may remain
the same; this may also be true of the value of the precious metals
and of the _quantity_ of commodities in circulation; and yet a change
in the exchange value of the latter may require now a larger and now
a smaller quantity of money for their circulation. Mill sees that a
part of the money in a country is in circulation, while another is
idle. With the aid of a most absurd average calculation he _assumes_
that, although it really appears to be different, yet all the gold in
a country does circulate. Assuming that ten million silver thalers
circulate in a country twice a year, there could be twenty million such
coins in circulation, if each circulated but once. And if the entire
quantity of silver to be found in a country in any form amounts to
one hundred million thalers, it may be supposed that the entire one
hundred million can enter circulation, if each piece of money should
circulate once in five years. One could as well assume that all the
money of the world circulate in Hempstead, but that each piece of
money instead of being employed three times a year, is employed once
in 3,000,000 years. The one assumption is as relevant as the other for
the purpose of determining the relation between the sum total of prices
of commodities and the volume of currency. Mill feels that it is a
matter of decisive importance to him to bring the commodities in direct
contact not with the money in circulation, but with the entire supply
of money existing in a country. He admits that “the whole of the goods
of a country are not exchanged at once against the whole of the money,”
but that the goods are exchanged in different portions and at different
times of the year for different portions of money. To do away with this
difficulty he _assumes_ that it does not exist. Moreover, this entire
idea of direct contact of commodities and money and direct exchange is
a mere abstraction from the movement of simple purchase and sale or
the function of money as a means of purchase. Already in the movement
of money as a means of payment, commodity and money cease to appear
simultaneously.

The commercial crises of the nineteenth century, namely, the great
crises of 1825 and 1836, did not result in any new developments in
the Ricardian theory of money, but they did furnish new applications
for it. They were no longer isolated economic phenomena, such as the
depreciation of the precious metals in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries which interested Hume, or the depreciation of paper money
in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries which confronted
Ricardo; they were the great storms of the world market in which the
conflict of all the elements of the capitalist process of production
discharge themselves, and whose origin and remedy were sought in the
most superficial and abstract sphere of this process, the sphere of
money circulation. The theoretical assumption from which the school
of economic weather prophets proceeds, comes down in the end to the
illusion that Ricardo discovered the laws governing the circulation of
purely metallic currency. The only thing that remained for them to do
was to subject to the same laws the circulation of credit and bank-note
currency.

The most general and most palpable phenomenon in commercial crises is
the sudden, general decline of prices following a prolonged general
rise. The general decline of prices of commodities may be expressed as
a rise in the relative value of money with respect to all commodities,
and the general rise of prices as a decline of the relative value
of money. In either expression the phenomenon is described but not
explained. Whether I put the question thus: explain the general
periodic rise of prices followed by a general decline of the same, or
formulate the same problem by saying: explain the periodic decline and
rise of the relative value of money with respect to commodities; the
different wording leaves the problem as little changed as would its
translation from German into English. Ricardo’s theory of money was
exceedingly convenient, because it lends a tautology the semblance of
a statement of causal connection. Whence comes the periodic general
fall of prices? From the periodic rise of the relative value of
money. Whence the general periodic rise of prices? From the periodic
decline of the relative value of money. It might have been stated
with equal truth that the periodic rise and fall of prices is due
to their periodic rise and fall. The problem itself is stated under
the assumption that the intrinsic value of money, i. e., its value
as determined by the cost of production of precious metals remains
_unchanged_. If it is more than a tautology then it is based on a
misconception of the most elementary principles. If the exchange value
of A measured in terms of B, declines, we know that this may be caused
by a decline of the value of A as much as by a rise of the value of
B; the same being true of the case of a rise of the exchange value of
A measured in terms of B. The tautology once admitted as a statement
of cause, the rest follows easily. A rise of prices of commodities is
caused by a decline of the value of money and a decline of the value
of money is caused, as we know from Ricardo, by a redundant currency,
i. e., by a rise of the volume of currency over the level determined
by its own intrinsic value and the intrinsic value of the commodities.
In the same manner, the general decline of prices of commodities is
explained by the rise of the value of money above its intrinsic value
in consequence of an inadequate currency. Thus, prices rise and fall
periodically, because there is periodically too much or too little
money in circulation. Should a rise of prices happen to coincide
with a contracted currency, and a fall of prices with an expanded
one, it may be asserted in spite of those facts that in consequence
of a contraction or expansion of the volume of commodities in the
market, which can not be proven statistically, the quantity of money
in circulation has, although not absolutely, yet relatively increased
or declined. We have seen that according to Ricardo these universal
fluctuations must take place even with a purely metallic currency, but
that they balance each other through their alternations; thus, e. g.,
an inadequate currency causes a fall of prices, the fall of prices
leads to the export of commodities abroad, this export causes again an
import of gold from abroad, which, in its turn, brings about a rise
of prices; the opposite movement taking place in case of a redundant
currency, when commodities are imported and money is exported. But,
since in spite of these universal fluctuations of prices which are in
perfect accord with Ricardo’s theory of metallic currency, their acute
and violent form, their crisis-form, belongs to the period of advanced
credit, it is perfectly clear that the issue of bank-notes is not
exactly regulated by the laws of metallic currency. Metallic currency
has its remedy in the import and export of precious metals which
immediately enter circulation and thus, by their influx or efflux,
cause the prices of commodities to fall or rise. The same effect on
prices must now be exerted by banks by the artificial imitation of the
laws of metallic currency. If gold is coming in from abroad it proves
that the currency is inadequate, that the value of money is too high
and the prices of commodities too low, and, consequently, that bank
notes must be put in circulation in proportion to the newly imported
gold. On the contrary, notes have to be withdrawn from circulation in
proportion to the export of gold from the country. That is to say,
the issue of bank notes must be regulated by the import and export
of the precious metals or by the rate of exchange. Ricardo’s false
assumption that gold is only coin, and that therefore all imported gold
swells the currency, causing prices to rise, while all exported gold
reduces the currency leading to a fall of prices, this theoretical
assumption is turned into a practical experiment of putting in every
case an amount of currency in circulation equal to the amount of gold
in existence. Lord Overstone (the banker Jones Loyd), Colonel Torrens,
Norman, Clay, Arbuthnot and a host of other writers, known in England
as the adherents of the “currency principle,” not only preached this
doctrine, but with the aid of Sir Robert Peel succeeded in 1844 and
1845 in making it the basis of the present English and Scotch bank
legislation. Its ignominous failure, theoretical as well as practical,
following upon experiments on the largest national scale, can be
treated only after we take up the theory of credit.[151] So much can be
seen, however, that the theory of Ricardo which isolates money in its
fluent form of currency, ends by ascribing to the ebbs and tides in the
supply of precious metals an influence on bourgeois economy such as the
believers in the superstitions of the monetary system had never dreamt
of. Thus did Ricardo, who proclaimed paper currency as the most perfect
form of money, become the prophet of the bullionists.

After Hume’s theory or the abstract opposition to the monetary system
was thus developed to its ultimate conclusions, Steuart’s concrete
conception of money was finally restored to its rights by THOMAS
TOOKE.[152] Tooke arrives at his principles not from any theory, but
by a conscientious analysis of the history of prices of commodities
from 1793 to 1856. In the first edition of his History of Prices which
appeared in 1823, Tooke is still under the complete influence of the
Ricardian theory, and vainly tries to reconcile it with actual facts.
His pamphlet “On the Currency,” which appeared after the crisis of
1825 might even be considered as the first consistent presentation
of the views which were later given the force of law by Overstone.
Continued studies in the history of prices forced him, however, to the
conclusion that the direct connection between prices and the volume of
currency, as it is pictured by the theory, is a mere illusion; that
the expansion and contraction of currency which takes place while the
value of the precious metals remains unchanged, is always the effect
but never the cause of price fluctuations; that the circulation of
money is in any event but a secondary movement; and that money assumes
quite different forms in the actual process of production in addition
to that of a circulating medium. His detailed investigations belong
to a sphere outside of that of simple metallic circulation and can be
discussed here as little as the investigations of WILSON and FULLARTON
which belong to the same class.[153] None of these writers takes a
one-sided view of money, but treat it in its various aspects; the
treatment, however, is mechanical, without an attempt to establish an
organic connection either between these various aspects themselves,
or between them and the combined system of economic categories. They
fall, therefore, into the error of confusing _money_ as distinguished
from _medium of circulation_ with _capital_ or even with commodity,
although they are forced elsewhere to differentiate it from both.[154]
When gold, e. g., is shipped abroad, it practically means that capital
is sent abroad, but the same thing takes place when iron, cotton,
grain, or any other commodity is exported. Both are capital and are
distinguished not as capital, but as money and commodity. The function
of gold as the international medium of exchange springs, therefore,
not from its being capital, but from its specific character of money.
Similarly, when gold, or bank notes in its place, circulate in the home
trade as means of payment, they constitute capital at the same time.
But they could not be replaced by capital in the form of commodities,
as has been demonstrated very palpably by crises, for instance. That
is to say, it is the fact that gold is distinguished from commodities
in its capacity of money and not in that of capital, that makes it the
means of payment. Even when capital is exported directly as capital,
as, e. g., when it is done for the purpose of lending abroad a certain
amount on interest, it depends on circumstances, whether it will be
exported in the form of commodities or in that of gold, and if in the
latter form, it is due to the specific destination of the precious
metals as distinguished from commodities to serve as money. In general,
these writers do not consider money in its abstract form, as it is
developed within the sphere of simple circulation of commodities,
and as it spontaneously grows out of the relation of the circulating
commodities. As a result, they constantly vacillate between the
abstract forms of money which distinguish it from commodity and those
forms of it beneath which are concealed concrete relations, such as
capital, revenue, etc.[155]




Introduction

to the

Critique of Political Economy.[156]

The subject of our discussion is first of all _material_ production
by individuals as determined by society, naturally constitutes the
starting point. The individual and isolated hunter or fisher who forms
the starting point with Smith and Ricardo, belongs to the insipid
illusions of the eighteenth century. They are Robinsonades which do
not by any means represent, as students of the history of civilization
imagine, a reaction against over-refinement and a return to a
misunderstood natural life. They are no more based on such a naturalism
than is Rosseau’s “contrat social,” which makes naturally independent
individuals come in contact and have mutual intercourse by contract.
They are the fiction and only the aesthetic fiction of the small and
great Robinsonades. They are, moreover, the anticipation of “bourgeois
society,” which had been in course of development since the sixteenth
century and made gigantic strides towards maturity in the eighteenth.
In this society of free competition the individual appears free from
the bonds of nature, etc., which in former epochs of history made him
a part of a definite, limited human conglomeration. To the prophets of
the eighteenth century, on whose shoulders Smith and Ricardo are still
standing, this eighteenth century individual, constituting the joint
product of the dissolution of the feudal form of society and of the new
forces of production which had developed since the sixteenth century,
appears as an ideal whose existence belongs to the past; not as a
result of history, but as its starting point.

Since that individual appeared to be in conformity with nature and
[corresponded] to their conception of human nature, [he was regarded]
not as a product of history, but of nature. This illusion has been
characteristic of every new epoch in the past. Steuart, who, as an
aristocrat, stood more firmly on historical ground, contrary to
the spirit of the eighteenth century, escaped this simplicity of
view. The further back we go into history, the more the individual
and, therefore, the producing individual seems to depend on and
constitute a part of a larger whole: at first it is, quite naturally,
the family and the clan, which is but an enlarged family; later on,
it is the community growing up in its different forms out of the
clash and the amalgamation of clans. It is but in the eighteenth
century, in “bourgeois society,” that the different forms of social
union confront the individual as a mere means to his private ends,
as an outward necessity. But the period in which this view of the
isolated individual becomes prevalent, is the very one in which the
interrelations of society (general from this point of view) have
reached the highest state of development. Man is in the most literal
sense of the word a _zoon politikon_, not only a social animal, but
an animal which can develop into an individual only in society.
Production by isolated individuals outside of society―something which
might happen as an exception to a civilized man who by accident
got into the wilderness and already dynamically possessed within
himself the forces of society―is as great an absurdity as the idea
of the development of language without individuals living together
and talking to one another. We need not dwell on this any longer.
It would not be necessary to touch upon this point at all, were not
the vagary which had its justification and sense with the people of
the eighteenth century transplanted in all earnest into the field of
political economy by Bastiat, Carey, Proudhon and others. Proudhon
and others naturally find it very pleasant, when they do not know the
historical origin of a certain economic phenomenon, to give it a quasi
historico-philosopohical explanation by going into mythology. Adam or
Prometheus hit upon the scheme cut and dried, whereupon it was adopted,
etc. Nothing is more tediously dry than the dreaming _locus communis_.

Whenever we speak, therefore, of production, we always have in mind
production at a certain stage of social development, or production
by social individuals. Hence, it might seem that in order to speak
of production at all, we must either trace the historical process of
development through its various phases, or declare at the outset that
we are dealing with a certain historical period, as, e. g., with modern
capitalistic production which, as a matter of fact, constitutes the
subject proper of this work. But all stages of production have certain
landmarks in common, common purposes. _Production in general_ is an
abstraction, but it is a rational abstraction, in so far as it singles
out and fixes the common features, thereby saving us repetition. Yet
these general or common features discovered by comparison constitute
something very complex, whose constituent elements have different
destinations. Some of these elements belong to all epochs, others are
common to a few. Some of them are common to the most modern as well
as to the most ancient epochs. No production is conceivable without
them; but while even the most completely developed languages have
laws and conditions in common with the least developed ones, what
is characteristic of their development are the points of departure
from the general and common. The conditions which generally govern
production must be differentiated in order that the essential points
of difference be not lost sight of in view of the general uniformity
which is due to the fact that the subject, mankind, and the object,
nature, remain the same. The failure to remember this one fact is the
source of all the wisdom of modern economists who are trying to prove
the eternal nature and harmony of existing social conditions. Thus they
say, e. g., that no production is possible without some instrument of
production, let that instrument be only the hand; that none is possible
without past accumulated labor, even if that labor consist of mere
skill which has been accumulated and concentrated in the hand of the
savage by repeated exercise. Capital is, among other things, also an
instrument of production, also past impersonal labor. Hence capital is
a universal, eternal natural phenomenon; which is true if we disregard
the specific properties which turn an “instrument of production” and
“stored up labor” into capital. The entire history of production
appears to a man like Carey, e. g., as a malicious perversion on the
part of governments.

If there is no production in general, there is also no general
production. Production is always some special branch of production or
an aggregate, as, e. g., agriculture, stock raising, manufactures,
etc. But political economy is not technology. The connection between
the general destinations of production at a given stage of social
development and the particular forms of production, is to be developed
elsewhere (later on).

Finally, production is not only of a special kind. It is always a
certain body politic, a social personality that is engaged on a larger
or smaller aggregate of branches of production. The connection between
the real process and its scientific presentation also falls outside
of the scope of this treatise. [We must thus distinguish between]
production in general, special branches of production and production as
a whole.

It is the fashion with economists to open their works with a general
introduction, which is entitled “production” (see, e. g., John Stuart
Mill) and deals with the general “requisites of production.”

This general introductory part treats or is supposed to treat:

1. Of the conditions without which production is impossible, i. e.,
of the most essential conditions of production. As a matter of fact,
however, it dwindles down, as we shall see, to a few very simple
definitions, which flatten out into shallow tautologies;

2. Of conditions which further production more or less, as, e. g., Adam
Smith’s [discussion of] a progressive and stagnant state of society.

In order to give scientific value to what serves with him as a mere
summary, it would be necessary to study the _degree of productivity_ by
periods in the development of individual nations; such a study falls
outside of the scope of the present subject, and in so far as it does
belong here is to be brought out in connection with the discussion
of competition, accumulation, etc. The commonly accepted view of the
matter gives a general answer to the effect that an industrial nation
is at the height of its production at the moment when it reaches its
historical climax in all respects. Or, that certain races, climates,
natural conditions, such as distance from the sea, fertility of
the soil, etc., are more favorable to production than others. That
again comes down to the tautology that the facility of creating
wealth depends on the extent to which its elements are present both
subjectively and objectively. As a matter of fact a nation is at its
industrial height so long as its main object is not gain, but the
process of gaining. In that respect the Yankees stand above the English.

But all that is not what the economists are really after in the general
introductory part. Their object is rather to represent production
in contradistinction to distribution―see Mill, e. g.―as subject to
eternal laws independent of history, and then to substitute bourgeois
relations, in an underhand way, as immutable natural laws of society
_in abstracto_. This is the more or less conscious aim of the entire
proceeding. On the contrary, when it comes to distribution, mankind
is supposed to have indulged in all sorts of arbitrary action. Quite
apart from the fact that they violently break the ties which bind
production and distribution together, so much must be clear from the
outset: that, no matter how greatly the systems of distribution may
vary at different stages of society, it should be possible here, as
in the case of production, to discover the common features and to
confound and eliminate all historical differences in formulating
_general human_ laws. E. g., the slave, the serf, the wage-worker―all
receive a quantity of food, which enables them to exist as slave,
serf, and wage-worker. The conqueror, the official, the landlord, the
monk, or the levite, who respectively live on tribute, taxes, rent,
alms, and the tithe,―all receive [a part] of the social product which
is determined by laws different from those which determine the part
received by the slave, etc. The two main points which all economists
place under this head, are: first, property; second, the protection
of the latter by the administration of justice, police, etc. The
objections to these two points can be stated very briefly.

1. All production is appropriation of nature by the individual within
and through a definite form of society. In that sense it is a tautology
to say that property (appropriation) is a condition of production. But
it becomes ridiculous, when from that one jumps at once to a definite
form of property, e. g. private property (which implies, besides, as
a prerequisite the existence of an opposite form, viz. absence of
property). History points rather to common property (e. g. among the
Hindoos, Slavs, ancient Celts, etc.) as the primitive form, which still
plays an important part at a much later period as communal property.
The question as to whether wealth grows more rapidly under this or that
form of property, is not even raised here as yet. But that there can
be no such a thing as production, nor, consequently, society, where
property does not exist in any form, is a tautology. Appropriation
which does not appropriate is a _contradictio in subjecto_.

2. Protection of property, etc. Reduced to their real meaning, these
commonplaces express more than what their preachers know, namely, that
every form of production creates its own legal relations, forms of
government, etc. The crudity and the shortcomings of the conception
lie in the tendency to see but an accidental reflective connection in
what constitutes an organic union. The bourgeois economists have a
vague notion that it is better to carry on production under the modern
police, than it was, e. g. under club-law. They forget that club law
is also law, and that the right of the stronger continues to exist in
other forms even under their “government of law.”

When the social conditions corresponding to a certain stage of
production are in a state of formation or disappearance, disturbances
of production naturally arise, although differing in extent and effect.

To sum up: all the stages of production have certain destinations in
common, which we generalize in thought; but the so-called general
conditions of all production are nothing but abstract conceptions which
do not go to make up any real stage in the history of production.


  2. THE GENERAL RELATION OF PRODUCTION TO DISTRIBUTION, EXCHANGE, AND
       CONSUMPTION.

Before going into a further analysis of production, it is necessary
to look at the various divisions which economists put side by side
with it. The most shallow conception is as follows: By production, the
members of society appropriate (produce and shape) the products of
nature to human wants; distribution determines the proportion in which
the individual participates in this production; exchange brings him the
particular products into which he wishes to turn the quantity secured
by him through distribution; finally, through consumption the products
become objects of use and enjoyment, of individual appropriation.
Production yields goods adopted to our needs; distribution distributes
them according to social laws; exchange distributes further what has
already been distributed, according to individual wants; finally, in
consumption the product drops out of the social movement, becoming the
direct object of the individual want which it serves and satisfies in
use. Production thus appears as the starting point; consumption as the
final end; and distribution and exchange as the middle; the latter
has a double aspect, distribution being defined as a process carried
on by society, while exchange, as one proceeding from the individual.
In production the person is embodied in things, in [consumption[157]]
things are embodied in persons; in distribution, society assumes
the part of go-between of production and consumption in the form of
generally prevailing rules; in exchange this is accomplished by the
accidental make-up of the individual.

Distribution determines what proportion (quantity) of the products the
individual is to receive; exchange determines the products in which the
individual desires to receive his share allotted to him by distribution.

Production, distribution, exchange, and consumption thus form a
perfect connection, production standing for the general, distribution
and exchange for the special, and consumption for the individual, in
which all are joined together. To be sure this is a connection, but
it does not go very deep. Production is determined [according to the
economists] by universal natural laws, while distribution depends
on social chance: distribution can, therefore, have a more or less
stimulating effect on production: exchange lies between the two as a
formal (?) social movement, and the final act of consumption which is
considered not only as a final purpose, but also as a final aim, falls,
properly, outside of the scope of economics, except in so far as it
reacts on the starting point and causes the entire process to begin all
over again.

The opponents of the economists―whether economists themselves or
not―who reproach them with tearing apart, like barbarians, what is an
organic whole, either stand on common ground with them or are _below_
them. Nothing is more common than the charge that the economists
have been considering production as an end in itself, too much to
the exclusion of everything else. The same has been said with regard
to distribution. This accusation is itself based on the economic
conception that distribution exists side by side with production as
a self-contained, independent sphere. Or [they are accused] that the
various factors are not treated by them in their connection as a
whole. As though it were the text books that impress this separation
upon life and not life upon the text books; and the subject at issue
were a dialectic balancing of conceptions and not an analysis of real
conditions.

_a. Production is at the same time also consumption._ Twofold
consumption, subjective and objective. The individual who develops his
faculties in production, is also expending them, consuming them in the
act of production, just as procreation is in its way a consumption
of vital powers. In the second place, production is consumption of
means of production which are used and used up and partly (as e. g. in
burning) reduced to their natural elements. The same is true of the
consumption of raw materials which do not remain in their natural form
and state, being greatly absorbed in the process. The act of production
is, therefore, in all its aspects an act of consumption as well. But
this is admitted by economists. Production as directly identical with
consumption, consumption as directly coincident with production,
they call productive consumption. This identity of production
and consumption finds its expression in Spinoza’s proposition,
_Determinatio est negatio_. But this definition of productive
consumption is resorted to just for the purpose of distinguishing
between consumption as identical with production and consumption
proper, which is defined as its destructive counterpart. Let us then
consider consumption proper.

Consumption is directly also production, just as in nature the
consumption of the elements and of chemical matter constitutes
production of plants. It is clear, that in nutrition, e. g., which
is but one form of consumption, man produces his own body; but it is
equally true of every kind of consumption, which goes to produce the
human being in one way or another. [It is] consumptive production.
But, say the economists, this production which is identical with
consumption, is a second production resulting from the destruction
of the product of the first. In the first, the producer transforms
himself into things; in the second, things are transformed into human
beings. Consequently, this consumptive production―although constituting
a direct unity of production and consumption―differs essentially from
production proper. The direct unity in which production coincides with
consumption and consumption with production, does not interfere with
their direct duality.

Production is thus at the same time consumption, and consumption is at
the same time production. Each is directly its own counterpart. But
at the same time an intermediary movement goes on between the two.
Production furthers consumption by creating material for the latter
which otherwise would lack its object. But consumption in its turn
furthers production, by providing for the products the individual
for whom they are products. The product receives its last finishing
touches in consumption. A railroad on which no one rides, which is,
consequently not used up, not consumed, is but a potential railroad,
and not a real one. Without production, no consumption; but, on the
other hand, without consumption, no production; since production would
then be without a purpose. Consumption produces production in two ways.

In the first place, in that the product first becomes a real product
in consumption; e. g., a garment becomes a real garment only through
the act of being worn; a dwelling which is not inhabited, is really no
dwelling; consequently, a product as distinguished from a mere natural
object, proves to be such, first _becomes_ a product in consumption.
Consumption gives the product the finishing touch by annihilating it,
since a product is the [result] of production not only as the material
embodiment of activity, but also as a mere object for the active
subject.

In the second place, consumption produces production by creating the
necessity for new production, i. e. by providing the ideal, inward,
impelling cause which constitutes the prerequisite of production.
Consumption furnishes the impulse for production as well as its object,
which plays in production the part of its guiding aim. It is clear
that while production furnishes the material object of consumption,
consumption provides the ideal object of production, as its image,
its want, its impulse and its purpose. It furnishes the object of
production in its subjective form. No wants, no production. But
consumption reproduces the want.

In its turn, production:

First, furnishes consumption[158] with its material, its object.
Consumption without an object is no consumption, hence production works
in this direction by producing consumption.

Second. But it is not only the object that production provides for
consumption. It gives consumption its definite outline, its character,
its finish. Just as consumption gives the product its finishing touch
as a product, production puts the finishing touch on consumption. For
the object is not simply an object in general, but a definite object,
which is consumed in a certain definite manner prescribed in its turn
by production. Hunger is hunger; but the hunger that is satisfied with
cooked meat eaten with fork and knife is a different kind of hunger
from the one that devours raw meat with the aid of hands, nails, and
teeth. Not only the object of consumption, but also the manner of
consumption is produced by production; that is to say, consumption is
created by production not only objectively, but also subjectively.
Production thus creates the consumers.

Third. Production not only supplies the want with material, but
supplies the material with a want. When consumption emerges from its
first stage of natural crudeness and directness―and its continuation
in that state would in itself be the result of a production still
remaining in a state of natural crudeness―it is itself furthered by its
object as a moving spring. The want of it which consumption experiences
is created by its appreciation of the product. The object of art, as
well as any other product, creates an artistic and beauty-enjoying
public. Production thus produces not only an object for the individual,
but also an individual for the object.

Production thus produces consumption: first, by furnishing the latter
with material; second, by determining the manner of consumption;
third, by creating in consumers a want for its products as objects of
consumption. It thus produces the object, the manner, and the moving
spring of consumption. In the same manner, consumption [creates] the
_disposition_ of the producer by setting (?) him up as an aim and by
stimulating wants. The identity of consumption and production thus
appears to be a three fold one.

First, direct identity: production is consumption; consumption is
production. Consumptive production. Productive consumption. Economists
call both productive consumption, but make one distinction by calling
the former reproduction, and the latter productive consumption. All
inquiries into the former deal with productive and unproductive labor;
those into the latter treat of productive and unproductive consumption.

Second. Each appears as the means of the other and as being brought
about by the other, which is expressed as their mutual interdependence;
a relation, by virtue of which they appear as mutually connected and
indispensable, yet remaining outside of each other.

Production creates the material as the outward object of consumption;
consumption creates the want as the inward object, the purpose of
production. Without production, no consumption; without consumption, no
production; this maxim figures (?) in political economy in many forms.

Third. Production is not only directly consumption and consumption
directly production; nor is production merely a means of consumption
and consumption the purpose of production. In other words, not only
does each furnish the other with its object; production, the material
object of consumption; consumption, the ideal object of production. On
the contrary, either one is not only directly the other, not (?) only
a means of furthering the other, but while it is taking place, creates
the other as such for itself (?). Consumption completes the act of
production by giving the finishing touch to the product as such, by
destroying the latter, by breaking up its independent material form; by
bringing to a state of readiness, through the necessity of repetition,
the disposition to produce developed in the first act of production;
that is to say, it is not only the concluding act through which the
product becomes a product, but also [the one] through which the
producer becomes a producer. On the other hand, production produces
consumption, by determining the manner of consumption, and further, by
creating the incentive for consumption, the very ability to consume, in
the form of want. This latter identity mentioned under point 3, is much
discussed in political economy in connection with the treatment of the
relations of demand and supply, of objects and wants, of natural wants
and those created by society.

Hence, it is the simplest matter with a Hegelian to treat production
and consumption as identical. And this has been done not only by
socialist writers of fiction but even by economists, e. g. Say; the
latter maintained that if we consider a nation as a whole, or mankind
_in abstracto_―her production is at the same time her consumption.
Storch pointed out Say’s error by calling attention to the fact that
a nation does not entirely consume her product, but also creates
means of production, fixed capital, etc. To consider society as a
single individual is moreover a false mode of speculative reasoning.
With an individual, production and consumption appear as different
aspects of one act. The important point to be emphasized here is that
if production and consumption be considered as activities of one
individual or of separate individuals, they appear at any rate as
aspects of one process in which production forms the actual starting
point and is, therefore, the predominating factor. Consumption,
as a natural necessity, as a want, constitutes an internal factor
of productive activity, but the latter is the starting point of
realization and, therefore, its predominating factor, the act into
which the entire process resolves itself in the end. The individual
produces a certain article and turns again into himself by consuming
it; but he returns as a productive and a self-reproducing individual.
Consumption thus appears as a factor of production.

In society, however, the relation of the producer to his product,
as soon as it is completed, is an outward one, and the return of
the product to the individual depends on his relations to other
individuals. He does not take immediate possession of it. Nor does the
direct appropriation of the product constitute his purpose, when he
produces in society. Between the producer and the product distribution
steps in, which determines by social laws his share in the world of
products; that is to say, distribution steps in between production and
consumption.

Does distribution form an independent sphere standing side by side with
and outside of production?

Production and Distribution._ In perusing the common treatises on
economics one can not help being struck with the fact that everything
is treated there twice; e. g., under distribution, there figure rent,
wages, interest, and profit; while under production we find land,
labor, and capital as agents of production. As regards capital, it
is at once clear that it is counted twice: first, as an agent of
production; second, as a source of income; as determining factors and
definite forms of distribution, interest and profit figure as such also
in production, since they are forms, in which capital increases and
grows, and are consequently factors of its own production. Interest and
profit, as forms of distribution, imply the existence of capital as
an agent of production. They are forms of distribution which have for
their prerequisite capital as an agent of production. They are also
forms of reproduction of capital.

In the same manner, wages is wage-labor when considered under another
head; the definite character which labor has in one case as an agent
of production, appears in the other as a form of distribution. If
labor were not fixed as wage-labor, its manner of participation in
distribution[159] would not appear as wages, as is the case e. g. under
slavery. Finally, rent―to take at once the most developed form of
distribution―by means of which landed property receives its share of
the products, implies the existence of large landed property (properly
speaking, agriculture on a large scale) as an agent of production,
and not simply land, no more than wages represents simply labor.
The relations and methods of distribution appear, therefore, merely
as the reverse sides of the agents of production. An individual who
participates in production as a wage laborer, receives his share of the
products, i. e. of the results of production, in the form of wages. The
subdivisions and organization of distribution are determined by the
subdivisions and organization of production. Distribution is itself a
product of production, not only in so far as the material goods are
concerned, since only the results of production can be distributed; but
also as regards its form, since the definite manner of participation
in production determines the particular form of distribution, the form
under which participation in distribution takes place. It is quite an
illusion to place land under production, rent under distribution, etc.

Economists, like Ricardo, who are accused above all of having paid
exclusive attention to production, define distribution, therefore,
as the exclusive subject of political economy, because they
instinctively[160] regard the forms of distribution as the clearest
forms in which the agents of production find expression in a given
society.

To the single individual distribution naturally appears as a law
established by society determining his position in the sphere of
production, within which he produces, and thus antedating production.
At the outset the individual has no capital, no landed property.
From his birth he is assigned to wage-labor by the social process of
distribution. But this very condition of being assigned to wage-labor
is the result of the existence of capital and landed property as
independent agents of production.

From the point of view of society as a whole, distribution seems to
antedate and to determine production in another way as well, as a
pre-economic fact, so to say. A conquering people divides the land
among the conquerors establishing thereby a certain division and
form of landed property and determining the character of production;
or, it turns the conquered people into slaves and thus makes slave
labor the basis of production. Or, a nation, by revolution, breaks up
large estates into small parcels of land and by this new distribution
imparts to production a new character. Or, legislation perpetuates
land ownership in large families or distributes labor as an hereditary
privilege and thus fixes it in castes.

In all of these cases, and they are all historic, it is not
distribution that seems to be organized and determined by production,
but on the contrary, production by distribution.

In the most shallow conception of distribution, the latter appears as
a distribution of products and to that extent as further removed from
and quasi-independent of production. But before distribution means
distribution of products, it is first, a distribution of the means of
production, and second, what is practically another wording of the
same fact, it is a distribution of the members of society among the
various kinds of production (the subjection of individuals to certain
conditions of production). The distribution of products is manifestly
a result of this distribution, which is bound up with the process of
production and determines the very organization of the latter. To
treat of production apart from the distribution which is comprised in
it, is plainly an idle abstraction. Conversely, we know the character
of the distribution of products the moment we are given the nature of
that other distribution which forms originally a factor of production.
Ricardo, who was concerned with the analysis of production as it is
organized in modern society and who was the economist of production
_par excellence_, for that very reason declares _not_ production
but distribution as the subject proper of modern economics. We have
here another evidence of the insipidity of the economists who treat
production as an eternal truth, and banish history to the domain of
distribution.

What relation to production this distribution, which has a determining
influence on production itself, assumes, is plainly a question which
falls within the province of production. Should it be maintained
that at least to the extent that production depends on a certain
distribution of the instruments of production, distribution in that
sense precedes production and constitutes its prerequisite; it may
be replied that production has in fact its prerequisite conditions,
which form factors of it. These may appear at first to have a natural
origin. By the very process of production they are changed from natural
to historical, and if they appear during one period as a natural
prerequisite of production, they formed at other periods its historical
result. Within the sphere of production itself they are undergoing a
constant change. E. g., the application of machinery produces a change
in the distribution of the instruments of production as well as in that
of products, and modern land ownership on a large scale is as much the
result of modern trade and modern industry, as that of the application
of the latter to agriculture.

All of these questions resolve themselves in the last instance to this:
How do general historical conditions affect production and what part
does it play at all in the course of history? It is evident that this
question can be taken up only in connection with the discussion and
analysis of production.

Yet in the trivial form in which these questions are raised above,
they can be answered just as briefly. In the case of all conquests
three ways lie open. The conquering people may impose its own methods
of production upon the conquered (e. g. the English in Ireland in the
nineteenth century, partly also in India); or, it may allow everything
to remain as it was contenting itself with tribute (e. g. the Turks
and the Romans); or, the two systems by mutually modifying each other
may result in something new, a synthesis (which partly resulted
from the Germanic conquests). In all of these conquests the method
of production, be it of the conquerors, the conquered, or the one
resulting from a combination of both, determines the nature of the new
distribution which comes into play. Although the latter appears now
as the prerequisite condition of the new period of production, it is
in itself but a product of production, not of production belonging to
history in general, but of production relating to a definite historical
period. The Mongols with their devastations in Russia e. g. acted
in accordance with their system of production, for which sufficient
pastures on large uninhabited stretches of country are the main
prerequisite. The Germanic barbarians, with whom agriculture carried
on with the aid of serfs was the traditional system of production and
who were accustomed to lonely life in the country, could introduce
the same conditions in the Roman provinces so much easier since the
concentration of landed property which had taken place there, died away
completely with the older systems of agriculture. There is a prevalent
tradition that in certain periods robbery constituted the only source
of living. But in order to be able to plunder, there must be something
to plunder, i. e. there must be production.[161] And even the method
of plunder is determined by the method of production. A stockjobbing
nation[162] e. g. can not be robbed in the same manner as a nation of
shepherds.

In the case of the slave the instrument of production is robbed
directly. But then the production of the country in whose interest he
is robbed, must be so organized as to admit of slave labor, or (as in
South America, etc.) a system of production must be introduced adapted
to slavery.

Laws may perpetuate an instrument of production, e. g. land, in certain
families. These laws assume an economic importance if large landed
property is in harmony with the system of production prevailing in
society, as is the case e. g. in England. In France agriculture had
been carried on on a small scale in spite of the large estates, and
the latter were, therefore, broken up by the Revolution. But how about
the legislative attempt to perpetuate the minute subdivision of the
land? In spite of these laws land ownership is concentrating again. The
effect of legislation on the maintenance of a system of distribution
and its resultant influence on production are to be determined
elsewhere.

_c. Exchange and Circulation._ Circulation is but a certain aspect
of exchange, or it may be defined as exchange considered as a whole.
Since _exchange_ is an intermediary factor between production and its
dependent, distribution, on the one hand, and consumption, on the
other; and since the latter appears but as a constituent of production,
exchange is manifestly also a constituent part of production.

In the first place, it is clear that the exchange of activities and
abilities which takes place in the sphere of production falls directly
within the latter and constitutes one of its essential elements. In
the second place, the same is true of the exchange of products, in
so far as it is a means of completing a certain product, designed
for immediate consumption. To that extent exchange constitutes an
act included in production. Thirdly, the so-called exchange between
dealers and dealers[163] is by virtue of its organization determined by
production, and is itself a species of productive activity. Exchange
appears to be independent of and indifferent to production only in the
last stage when products are exchanged directly for consumption. But
in the first place, there is no exchange without a division of labor,
whether natural or as a result of historical development; secondly,
private exchange implies the existence of private production; thirdly,
the intensity of exchange, as well as its extent and character are
determined by the degree of development and organization of production,
as e. g. exchange between city and country, exchange in the country, in
the city, etc. Exchange thus appears in all its aspects to be directly
included in or determined by production.

The result we arrive at is not that production, distribution, exchange,
and consumption are identical, but that they are all members of one
entity, different sides of one unit. Production predominates not only
over production itself in the opposite sense of that term, but over
the other elements as well. With it the process constantly starts over
again. That exchange and consumption can not be the predominating
elements is self evident. The same is true of distribution in the
narrow sense of distribution of products; as for distribution in the
sense of distribution of the agents of production, it is itself but a
factor of production. A definite [form of] production thus determines
the [forms of] consumption, distribution, exchange, and _also the
mutual relations between these various elements_. Of course, production
_in its one-sided form_ is in its turn influenced by other elements; e.
g. with the expansion of the market, i. e. of the sphere of exchange,
production grows in volume and is subdivided to a greater extent.

With a change in distribution, production undergoes a change; as
e. g. in the case of concentration of capital, of a change in the
distribution of population in city and country, etc. Finally, the
demands of consumption also influence production. A mutual interaction
takes place between the various elements. Such is the case with every
organic body.


When we consider a given country from a politico-economic standpoint,
we begin with its population, then analyze the latter according to
its subdivision into classes, location in city, country, or by the
sea, occupation in different branches of production; then we study
its exports and imports, annual production and consumption, prices of
commodities, etc. It seems to be the correct procedure to commence
with the real and concrete aspect of conditions as they are; in the
case of political economy, to commence with population which is the
basis and the author of the entire productive activity of society.
Yet, on closer consideration it proves to be wrong. Population is an
abstraction, if we leave out e. g. the classes of which it consists.
These classes, again, are but an empty word, unless we know what are
the elements on which they are based, such as wage-labor, capital,
etc. Those imply, in their turn, exchange, division of labor, prices,
etc. Capital, e. g. does not mean anything without wage-labor, value,
money, price, etc. If we start out, therefore, with population, we do
so with a chaotic conception of the whole, and by closer analysis we
will gradually arrive at simpler ideas; thus we shall proceed from the
imaginary concrete to loss and less complex abstractions, until we
get at the simplest conception. This once attained, we might start
on our return journey until we would finally come back to population,
but this time not as a chaotic notion of an integral whole, but as a
rich aggregate of many conceptions and relations. The former method
is the one which political economy had adopted in the past at its
inception. The economists of the seventeenth century, e. g., always
started out with the living aggregate: population, nation, state,
several states, etc., but in the end they invariably arrived, by means
of analysis, at certain leading, abstract general principles, such
as division of labor, money, value, etc. As soon as these separate
elements had been more or less established by abstract reasoning,
there arose the systems of political economy which start from simple
conceptions, such as labor, division of labor, demand, exchange value,
and conclude with state, international exchange and world market. The
latter is manifestly the scientifically correct method. The concrete is
concrete, because it is a combination of many objects with different
destinations, i. e. a unity of diverse elements. In our thought, it
therefore appears as a process of synthesis, as a result, and not as a
starting point, although it is the real starting point and, therefore,
also the starting point of observation and conception. By the former
method the complete conception passes into an abstract definition; by
the latter, the abstract definitions lead to the reproduction of the
concrete subject in the course of reasoning. Hegel fell into the error,
therefore, of considering the real as the result of self-coordinating,
self-absorbed, and spontaneously operating thought, while the method of
advancing from the abstract to the concrete is but a way of thinking
by which the concrete is grasped and is reproduced in our mind as
a concrete. It is by no means, however, the process which itself
generates the concrete. The simplest economic category, say, exchange
value, implies the existence of population, population that is engaged
in production under certain conditions; it also implies the existence
of certain types of family, clan, or state, etc. It can have no other
existence except as an abstract one-sided relation of an already given
concrete and living aggregate.

As a category, however, exchange value leads an antediluvian existence.
And since our philosophic consciousness is so arranged that only the
image of the man that it conceives appears to it as the real man
and the world as it conceives it, as the real world; it mistakes
the movement of categories for the real act of production (which
unfortunately (?) receives only its impetus from outside) whose
result is the world; that is true―here we have, however, again a
tautology―in so far as the concrete aggregate is a thought aggregate,
in so far as the concrete subject of our thought is in fact a product
of thought, of comprehension; not, however, in the sense of a product
of a self-emanating conception which works outside of and stands
above observation and imagination, but of a mental consummation of
observation and imagination. The whole, as it appears in our heads as
a thought-aggregate, is the product of a thinking mind which grasps
the world in the only way open to it, a way which differs from the one
employed by the artistic, religious, or practical mind. The concrete
subject continues to lead an independent existence after it has been
grasped, as it did before, outside of the head, so long as the head
contemplates it only speculatively, theoretically. So that in the
employment of the theoretical method [in political economy], the
subject, society, must constantly be kept in mind as the premise from
which we start.

But have these simple categories no independent historical or natural
existence antedating the more concrete ones? _Ça depend._ For instance,
in his Philosophy of Law Hegel rightly starts out with possession,
as the simplest legal relation of individuals. But there is no such
thing as possession before the family or the relations of lord and
serf, which are a great deal more concrete relations, have come into
existence. On the other hand, one would be right in saying that there
are families and clans which only _possess_, but do not _own_ things.
The simpler category thus appears as a relation of simple family and
clan communities with respect to property. In earlier society the
category appears as a simple relation of a developed organism, but the
concrete substratum from which springs the relation of possession, is
always implied. One can imagine an isolated savage in possession of
things. But in that case possession is no legal relation. It is not
true that the family came as the result of the historical evolution of
possession. On the contrary, the latter always implies the existence
of this “more concrete category of law.” Yet so much may be said, that
the simple categories are the expression of relations in which the
less developed concrete entity may have been realized without entering
into the manifold relations and bearings which are mentally expressed
in the concrete category; but when the concrete entity attains fuller
development it will retain the same category as a subordinate relation.

Money may exist and actually had existed in history before capital, or
banks, or wage-labor came into existence. With that in mind, it may be
said that the more simple category can serve as an expression of the
predominant relations of an undeveloped whole or of the subordinate
relations of a more developed whole, [relations] which had historically
existed before the whole developed in the direction expressed in the
more concrete category. In so far, the laws of abstract reasoning which
ascends from the most simple to the complex, correspond to the actual
process of history.

On the other hand, it may be said that there are highly developed but
historically unripe forms of society in which the highest economic
forms are to be found, such as co-operation, advanced division of
labor, etc., and yet there is no money in existence, e. g. Peru.

In Slavic communities also, money, as well as exchange to which it
owes its existence, does not appear at all or very little within the
separate communities, but it appears on their boundaries in their
inter-communal traffic; in general, it is erroneous to consider
exchange as a constituent element originating within the community.
It appears at first more in the mutual relations between different
communities, than in those between the members of the same community.
Furthermore, although money begins to play its part everywhere at an
early stage, it plays in antiquity the part of a predominant element
only in one-sidedly developed nations, viz. trading nations, and even
in most cultured antiquity, in Greece and Rome, it attains its full
development, which constitutes the prerequisite of modern bourgeois
society, only in the period of their decay. Thus, this quite simple
category attained its culmination in the past only at the most advanced
stages of society. Even then it did not pervade (?) all economic
relations; in Rome e. g. at the time of its highest development taxes
and payments in kind remained the basis. As a matter of fact, the money
system was fully developed there only so far as the army was concerned;
it never came to dominate the entire system of labor.

Thus, although the simple category may have existed historically before
the more concrete one, it can attain its complete internal and external
development only in complex (?) forms of society, while the more
concrete category has reached its full development in a less advanced
form of society.

Labor is quite a simple category. The idea of labor in that sense, as
labor in general, is also very old. Yet, “labor” thus simply defined
by political economy is as much a modern category, as the conditions
which have given rise to this simple abstraction. The monetary system,
e. g. defines wealth quite objectively, as a thing (?)[164] in money.
Compared with this point of view, it was a great step forward, when
the industrial or commercial system came to see the source of wealth
not in the object but in the activity of persons, viz. in commercial
and industrial labor. But even the latter was thus considered only
in the limited sense of a money producing activity. The physiocratic
system [marks still further progress] in that it considers a certain
form of labor, viz. agriculture, as the source of wealth, and wealth
itself not in the disguise of money, but as a product in general, as
the general result of labor. But corresponding to the limitations of
the activity, this product is still only a natural product. Agriculture
is productive, land is the source of production _par excellence_. It
was a tremendous advance on the part of Adam Smith to throw aside all
limitations which mark wealth-producing activity and [to define it] as
labor in general, neither industrial, nor commercial, nor agricultural,
or one as much as the other. Along with the universal character of
wealth-creating activity we have now the universal character of the
object defined as wealth, viz. product in general, or labor in general,
but as past incorporated labor. How difficult and great was the
transition, is evident from the way Adam Smith himself falls back from
time to time into the physiocratic system. Now, it might seem as though
this amounted simply to finding an abstract expression for the simplest
relation into which men have been mutually entering as producers from
times of yore, no matter under what form of society. In one sense this
is true. In another it is not.

The indifference as to the particular kind of labor implies the
existence of a highly developed aggregate of different species of
concrete labor, none of which is any longer the predominant one. So
do the most general abstractions commonly arise only where there is
the highest concrete development, where one feature appears to be
jointly possessed by many, and to be common to all. Then it can not
be thought of any longer in one particular form. On the other hand,
this abstraction of labor is but the result of a concrete aggregate of
different kinds of labor. The indifference to the particular kind of
labor corresponds to a form of society in which individuals pass with
ease from one kind of work to another, which makes it immaterial to
them what particular kind of work may fall to their share. Labor has
become here, not only categorically but really, a means of creating
wealth in general and is no longer grown together with the individual
into one particular destination. This state of affairs has found its
highest development in the most modern of bourgeois societies, the
United States. It is only here that the abstraction of the category
“labor,” “labor in general,” labor _sans phrase_, the starting point
of modern political economy, becomes realized in practice. Thus,
the simplest abstraction which modern political economy sets up as
its starting point, and which expresses a relation dating back to
antiquity and prevalent under all forms of society, appears in this
abstraction truly realized only as a category of the most modern
society. It might be said that what appears in the United States as an
historical product,―viz. the indifference as to the particular kind of
labor―appears among the Russians e. g. as a natural disposition. But it
makes all the difference in the world whether barbarians have a natural
predisposition which makes them applicable alike to everything, or
whether civilized people apply themselves to everything. And, besides,
this indifference of the Russians as to the kind of work they do,
corresponds to their traditional practice of remaining in the rut of a
quite definite occupation until they are thrown out of it by external
influences.

This example of labor strikingly shows how even the most abstract
categories, in spite of their applicability to all epochs―just because
of their abstract character―are by the very definiteness of the
abstraction a product of historical conditions as well, and are fully
applicable only to and under those conditions.

The bourgeois society is the most highly developed and most highly
differentiated historical organization of production. The categories
which serve as the expression of its conditions and the comprehension
of its own organization enable it at the same time to gain an insight
into the organization and the conditions of production which had
prevailed under all the past forms of society, on the ruins and
constituent elements of which it has arisen, and of which it still
drags along some unsurmounted remnants, while what had formerly been
mere intimation has now developed to complete significance. The anatomy
of the human being is the key to the anatomy of the ape. But the
intimations of a higher animal in lower ones can be understood only if
the animal of the higher order is already known. The bourgeois economy
furnishes a key to ancient economy, etc. This is, however, by no means
true of the method of those economists who blot out all historical
differences and see the bourgeois form in all forms of society. One can
understand the nature of tribute, tithes, etc., after one has learned
the nature of rent. But they must not be considered identical.

Since, furthermore, bourgeois society is but a form resulting from
the development of antagonistic elements, some relations belonging
to earlier forms of society are frequently to be found in it but in
a crippled state or as a travesty of their former self, as e. g.
communal property. While it may be said, therefore, that the categories
of bourgeois economy contain what is true of all other forms of
society, the statement is to be taken _cum grano salis_. They may
contain these in a developed, or crippled, or caricatured form, but
always essentially different. The so-called historical development
amounts in the last analysis to this, that the last form considers its
predecessors as stages leading up to itself and perceives them always
one-sidedly, since it is very seldom and only under certain conditions
that it is capable of self-criticism; of course, we do not speak here
of such historical periods which appear to their own contemporaries as
periods of decay. The Christian religion became capable to assist us
to an objective view of past mythologies as soon as it was ready for
self-criticism to a certain extent, _dynamei_ so-to-say. In the same
way bourgeois political economy first came to understand the feudal,
the ancient, and the oriental societies as soon as the self-criticism
of the bourgeois society had commenced. So far as bourgeois political
economy has not gone into the mythology of purely (?) identifying the
bourgeois system with the past, its criticism of the feudal system
against which it still had to wage war resembled Christian criticism
of the heathen religions or Protestant criticism of Catholicism.

In the study of economic categories, as in the case of every historical
and social science, it must be borne in mind that as in reality so
in our mind the subject, in this case modern bourgeois society, is
given and that the categories are therefore but forms of expression,
manifestations of existence, and frequently but one-sided aspects of
this subject, this definite society; and that, therefore, the origin of
[political economy] _as a science_ does not by any means date from the
time to which it is referred _as such_. This is to be firmly held in
mind because it has an immediate and important bearing on the matter of
the subdivisions of the science.

For instance, nothing seems more natural than to start with rent, with
landed property, since it is bound up with land, the source of all
production and all existence, and with the first form of production in
all more or less settled communities, viz. agriculture. But nothing
would be more erroneous. Under all forms of society there is a certain
industry which predominates over all the rest and whose condition
therefore determines the rank and influence of all the rest.

It is the universal light with which all the other colors are tinged
and are modified through its peculiarity. It is a special ether which
determines the specific gravity of everything that appears in it.

Let us take for example pastoral nations (mere hunting and fishing
tribes are not as yet at the point from which real development
commences). They engage in a certain form of agriculture, sporadically.
The nature of land-ownership is determined thereby. It is held in
common and retains this form more or less according to the extent to
which these nations hold on to traditions; such e. g. is land-ownership
among the Slavs. Among nations whose agriculture is carried on by a
settled population―the settled state constituting a great advance―where
agriculture is the predominant industry, such as in ancient and feudal
societies, even the manufacturing industry and its organization, as
well as the forms of property which pertain to it, have more or less
the characteristic features of the prevailing system of land ownership;
[society] is then either entirely dependent upon agriculture, as in the
case of ancient Rome, or, as in the middle ages, it imitates in its
city relations the forms of organization prevailing in the country.
Even capital, with the exception of pure money capital, has, in the
form of the traditional working tool, the characteristics of land
ownership in the Middle Ages.

The reverse is true of bourgeois society. Agriculture comes to be more
and more merely a branch of industry and is completely dominated by
capital. The same is true of rent. In all the forms of society in which
land ownership is the prevalent form, the influence of the natural
element is the predominant one. In those where capital predominates the
prevailing element is the one historically created by society. Rent
can not be understood without capital, nor can capital, without rent.
Capital is the all dominating economic power of bourgeois society. It
must form the starting point as well as the end and be developed before
land-ownership is. After each has been considered separately, their
mutual relation must be analyzed.

It would thus be impractical and wrong to arrange the economic
categories in the order in which they were the determining factors in
the course of history. Their order of sequence is rather determined
by the relation which they bear to one another in modern bourgeois
society, and which is the exact opposite of what seems to be their
natural order or the order of their historical development. What we are
interested in is not the place which economic relations occupy in the
historical succession of different forms of society. Still less are we
interested in the order of their succession “in idea” (_Proudhon_),
which is but a hazy (?) conception of the course of history. We are
interested in their organic connection within modern bourgeois society.

The sharp line of demarkation (abstract precision) which so clearly
distinguished the trading nations of antiquity, such as the
Phenicians and the Carthagenians, was due to that very predominance
of agriculture. Capital as trading or money capital appears in that
abstraction, where capital does not constitute as yet the predominating
element of society. The Lombardians and the Jews occupied the same
position among the agricultural nations of the middle ages.

As a further illustration of the fact that the same category plays
different parts at different stages of society, we may mention the
following: one of the latest forms of bourgeois society, viz. stock
companies, appear also at its beginning in the form of the great
chartered monopolistic trading companies. The conception of national
wealth which is imperceptibly formed in the minds of the economists of
the seventeenth century, and which partly continues to be entertained
by those of the eighteenth century, is that wealth is produced solely
for the state, but that the power of the latter is proportional to that
wealth. It was as yet an unconsciously hypocritical way in which wealth
announced itself and its own production as the aim of modern states
considering the latter merely as a means to the production of wealth.

The order of treatment must manifestly be as follows: first, the
general abstract definitions which are more or less applicable to
all forms of society, but in the sense indicated above. Second, the
categories which go to make up the inner organization of bourgeois
society and constitute the foundations of the principal classes;
capital, wage-labor, landed property; their mutual relations; city and
country; the three great social classes, the exchange between them;
circulation, credit (private). Third, the organization of bourgeois
society in the form of a state, considered in relation to itself; the
“unproductive” classes; taxes; public debts; public credit; population;
colonies; emigration. Fourth, the international organization of
production; international division of labor; international exchange;
import and export; rate of exchange. Fifth, the world market and
crises.



Notes on the points to be mentioned here and not to be omitted:[166]

_War_ attains complete development before peace; how certain
economic phenomena, such as wage-labor, machinery, etc., are developed
at an earlier date through war and in armies than within bourgeois
society. The connection between productive force and the means of
communication is made especially plain in the case of the army.

The relation between the idealistic and realistic methods of writing
history; namely, the so-called history of civilization which is all a
history of religion and states.

In this connection something may be said of the different methods
hitherto employed in writing history. The so-called objective [method].
The subjective. (The moral and others). The philosophic.

_Secondary and tertiary._ Conditions of production which have been
taken over or transplanted; in general, those that are not original.
Here [is to be treated] the effect of international relations.

Objections to the materialistic character of this view. Its relation
to naturalistic materialism.

The dialectics of the conceptions productive force (means of
production) and relation of production, dialectics whose limits are to
be determined and which does not do away with the concrete difference.

The unequal relation between the development of material production
and art, for instance. In general, the conception of progress is not
to be taken in the sense of the usual abstraction. In the case of
art, etc., it is not so important and difficult to understand this
disproportion as in that of practical social relations, e. g. the
relation between education in the United States and Europe. The really
difficult point, however, that is to be discussed here is that of the
unequal (?) development of relations of production as legal relations.
As, e. g., the connection between Roman civil law (this is less true of
criminal and public law) and modern production.

This conception of development appears to imply necessity. On the
other hand, justification of accident. Varia. (Freedom and other
points). (The effect of means of communication). World history does not
always appear in history as the result of world history.

The starting point [is to be found] in certain facts of nature
embodied subjectively and objectively in clans, races, etc.



It is well known that certain periods of highest development of art
stand in no direct connection with the general development of society,
nor with the material basis and the skeleton structure of its
organization. Witness the example of the Greeks as compared with the
modern nations or even Shakespeare. As regards certain forms of art, as
e. g. the epos, it is admitted that they can never be produced in the
world-epoch making form as soon as art as such comes into existence; in
other words, that in the domain of art certain important forms of it
are possible only at a low stage of its development. If that be true of
the mutual relations of different forms of art within the domain of art
itself, it is far less surprising that the same is true of the relation
of art as a whole to the general development of society. The difficulty
lies only in the general formulation of these contradictions. No sooner
are they specified than they are explained. Let us take for instance
the relation of Greek art and of that of Shakespeare’s time to our own.
It is a well known fact that Greek mythology was not only the arsenal
of Greek art, but also the very ground from which it had sprung. Is the
view of nature and of social relations which shaped Greek imagination
and Greek [art] possible in the age of automatic machinery, and
railways, and locomotives, and electric telegraphs? Where does Vulcan
come in as against Roberts & Co.; Jupiter, as against the lightning
rod; and Hermes, as against the Credit Mobilier? All mythology masters
and dominates and shapes the forces of nature in and through the
imagination; hence it disappears as soon as man gains mastery over
the forces of nature. What becomes of the Goddess Fame side by side
with Printing House Square?[169] Greek art presupposes the existence
of Greek mythology, i. e. that nature and even the form of society are
wrought up in popular fancy in an unconsciously artistic fashion. That
is its material. Not, however, any mythology taken at random, nor any
accidental unconsciously artistic elaboration of nature (including
under the latter all objects, hence [also] society). Egyptian mythology
could never be the soil or womb which would give birth to Greek art.
But in any event [there had to be] _a_ mythology. In no event [could
Greek art originate] in a society which excludes any mythological
explanation of nature, any mythological attitude towards it and which
requires from the artist an imagination free from mythology.

Looking at it from another side: is Achilles possible side by side with
powder and lead? Or is the Iliad at all compatible with the printing
press and steam press? Does not singing and reciting and the muses
necessarily go out of existence with the appearance of the printer’s
bar, and do not, therefore, disappear the prerequisites of epic poetry?

But the difficulty is not in grasping the idea that Greek art and
epos are bound up with certain forms of social development. It rather
lies in understanding why they still constitute with us a source of
aesthetic enjoyment and in certain respects prevail as the standard
and model beyond attainment.

A man can not become a child again unless he becomes childish. But does
he not enjoy the artless ways of the child and must he not strive to
reproduce its truth on a higher plane? Is not the character of every
epoch revived perfectly true to nature in child nature? Why should the
social childhood of mankind, where it had obtained its most beautiful
development, not exert an eternal charm as an age that will never
return? There are ill-bred children and precocious children. Many of
the ancient nations belong to the latter class. The Greeks were normal
children. The charm their art has for us does not conflict with the
primitive character of the social order from which it had sprung. It is
rather the product of the latter, and is rather due to the fact that
the unripe social conditions under which the art arose and under which
alone it could appear can never return.

I consider the system of bourgeois economy in the following order:
_Capital_, _landed property_, _wage labor_; _state_, _foreign trade_,
_world market_. Under the first three heads I examine the conditions
of the economic existence of the three great classes, which make up
modern bourgeois society; the connection of the three remaining heads
is self evident. The first part of the first book, treating of capital,
consists of the following chapters: 1. Commodity; 2. Money, or simple
circulation; 3. Capital in general. The first two chapters form the
contents of the present work. The entire material lies before me in the
form of monographs, written at long intervals not for publication, but
for the purpose of clearing up those questions to myself, and their
systematic elaboration on the plan outlined above will depend upon
circumstances.

I omit a general introduction which I had prepared, as on second
thought any anticipation of results that are still to be proven, seemed
to me objectionable, and the reader who wishes to follow me at all,
must make up his mind to pass from the special to the general. On the
other hand, some remarks as to the course of my own politico-economic
studies may be in place here.

The subject of my professional studies was jurisprudence, which I
pursued, however, in connection with and as secondary to the studies
of philosophy and history. In 1842-43, as editor of the “Rheinische
Zeitung,” I found myself embarrassed at first when I had to take part
in discussions concerning so-called material interests. The proceedings
of the Rhine Diet in connection with forest thefts and the extreme
subdivision of landed property; the official controversy about the
condition of the Mosel peasants into which Herr von Schaper, at that
time president of the Rhine Province, entered with the “Rheinische
Zeitung;” finally, the debates on free trade and protection, gave
me the first impulse to take up the study of economic questions. At
the same time a weak, quasi-philosophic echo of French socialism and
communism made itself heard in the “Rheinische Zeitung” in those days
when the good intentions “to go ahead” greatly outweighed knowledge of
facts. I declared myself against such botching, but had to admit at
once in a controversy with the “Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung” that my
previous studies did not allow me to hazard an independent judgment as
to the merits of the French schools. When, therefore, the publishers
of the “Rheinische Zeitung” conceived the illusion that by a less
aggressive policy the paper could be saved from the death sentence
pronounced upon it, I was glad to grasp that opportunity to retire to
my study room from public life.

The first work undertaken for the solution of the question that
troubled me, was a critical revision of Hegel’s “Philosophy of Law”;
the introduction to that work appeared in the “Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher,” published in Paris in 1844. I was led by my studies to
the conclusion that legal relations as well as forms of state could
neither be understood by themselves, nor explained by the so-called
general progress of the human mind, but that they are rooted in the
material conditions of life, which are summed up by Hegel after the
fashion of the English and French of the eighteenth century under
the name “civic society;” the anatomy of that civic society is to
be sought in political economy. The study of the latter which I had
taken up in Paris, I continued at Brussels whither I emigrated on
account of an order of expulsion issued by Mr. Guizot. The general
conclusion at which I arrived and which, once reached, continued to
serve as the leading thread in my studies, may be briefly summed up as
follows: In the social production which men carry on they enter into
definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their
will; these relations of production correspond to a definite stage
of development of their material powers of production. The sum total
of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure
of society―the real foundation, on which rise legal and political
superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness. The mode of production in material life determines the
general character of the social, political and spiritual processes
of life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines
their consciousness. At a certain stage of their development, the
material forces of production in society come in conflict with the
existing relations of production, or―what is but a legal expression
for the same thing―with the property relations within which they
had been at work before. From forms of development of the forces
of production these relations turn into their fetters. Then comes
the period of social revolution. With the change of the economic
foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly
transformed. In considering such transformations the distinction should
always be made between the material transformation of the economic
conditions of production which can be determined with the precision
of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or
philosophic―in short ideological forms in which men become conscious of
this conflict and fight it out. Just as our opinion of an individual
is not based on what he thinks of himself, so can we not judge of such
a period of transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary,
this consciousness must rather be explained from the contradictions of
material life, from the existing conflict between the social forces
of production and the relations of production. No social order ever
disappears before all the productive forces, for which there is room
in it, have been developed; and new higher relations of production
never appear before the material conditions of their existence have
matured in the womb of the old society. Therefore, mankind always
takes up only such problems as it can solve; since, looking at the
matter more closely, we will always find that the problem itself
arises only when the material conditions necessary for its solution
already exist or are at least in the process of formation. In broad
outlines we can designate the Asiatic, the ancient, the feudal, and
the modern bourgeois methods of production as so many epochs in the
progress of the economic formation of society. The bourgeois relations
of production are the last antagonistic form of the social process of
production―antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonism, but
of one arising from conditions surrounding the life of individuals in
society; at the same time the productive forces developing in the womb
of bourgeois society create the material conditions for the solution
of that antagonism. This social formation constitutes, therefore, the
closing chapter of the prehistoric stage of human society.

Frederick Engels, with whom I was continually corresponding and
exchanging ideas since the appearance of his ingenious critical essay
on economic categories (in the “Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher”),
came by a different road to the same conclusions as myself (see his
“Condition of the Working Classes in England”). When he, too, settled
in Brussels in the spring of 1845, we decided to work out together the
contrast between our view and the idealism of the German philosophy, in
fact to settle our accounts with our former philosophic conscience. The
plan was carried out in the form of a criticism of the post-Hegelian
philosophy. The manuscript in two solid octavo volumes had long
reached the publisher in Westphalia, when we received information
that conditions had so changed as not to allow of its publication. We
abandoned the manuscript to the stinging criticism of the mice the
more readily since we had accomplished our main purpose―the clearing
up of the question to ourselves. Of the scattered writings on various
subjects in which we presented our views to the public at that time, I
recall only the “Manifesto of the Communist Party” written by Engels
and myself, and the “Discourse on Free Trade” written by myself. The
leading points of our theory were first presented scientifically,
though in a polemic form, in my “Misère de la Philosophie, etc.”
directed against Proudhon and published in 1847. An essay on “Wage
Labor,” written by me in German, and in which I put together my
lectures on the subject delivered before the German Workmen’s Club at
Brussels, was prevented from leaving the hands of the printer by the
February revolution and my expulsion from Belgium which followed it as
a consequence.

The publication of the “Neue Rheinische Zeitung” in 1848 and 1849, and
the events which took place later on, interrupted my economic studies
which I could not resume before 1850 in London. The enormous material
on the history of political economy which is accumulated in the British
Museum; the favorable view which London offers for the observation of
bourgeois society; finally, the new stage of development upon which the
latter seemed to have entered with the discovery of gold in California
and Australia, led me to the decision to resume my studies from the
very beginning and work up critically the new material. These studies
partly led to what might seem side questions, over which I nevertheless
had to stop for longer or shorter periods of time. Especially was the
time at my disposal cut down by the imperative necessity of working
for a living. My work as contributor on the leading Anglo-American
newspaper, the “New York Tribune,” at which I have now been engaged for
eight years, has caused very great interruption in my studies, since
I engage in newspaper work proper only occasionally. Yet articles on
important economic events in England and on the continent have formed
so large a part of my contributions that I have been obliged to make
myself familiar with practical details which lie outside the proper
sphere of political economy.

This account of the course of my studies in political economy is simply
to prove that my views, whatever one may think of them, and no matter
how little they agree with the interested prejudices of the ruling
classes, are the result of many years of conscientious research. At the
entrance to science, however, the same requirement must be put as at
the entrance to hell:

  Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto
  Ogni viltà convien che qui sia morta.


  Karl Marx.

  London, January, 1859.




CONTENTS.



                                                                  PAGE.

  Translator’s Preface                                                3

  Author’s Preface                                                    9


  BOOK I. CAPITAL IN GENERAL.

  Chapter I. Commodities                                             19

    A. Notes on the History of the Theory of Value                   56

  Chapter II. Money or Simple Circulation                            73

      1. The Measure of Value                                        74

    B. Theories of the Unit of Measure of Money                      91

      2. The Medium of Circulation                                  107

        a. The Metamorphosis of Commodities                         108

        b. The Circulation of Money                                 125

        c. Coin and Symbols of Value                                138

      3. Money                                                      162

        a. Hoarding                                                 166

        b. Means of Payment                                         185

        c. World Money                                              201

      4. The Precious Metals                                        208

    C. Theories of the Medium of Circulation and of
         Money                                                      215

  Appendix. Introduction to the Critique of Political
    Economy                                                         264

      1. Production in General                                      265

      2. The General Relation of Production to Distribution,
           Exchange, and Consumption                                274

      3. The Method of Political Economy                            292

      4. Production, Means of Production, and Conditions
           of Production                                            306

  Index                                                             313




CAPITAL IN GENERAL.




BOOK I.




CHAPTER I.

COMMODITIES.


At first sight the wealth of society under the capitalist system
presents itself as an immense accumulation of commodities, its unit
being a single commodity. But every commodity has a twofold aspect,
that of _use value_ and _exchange value_.[2]

A commodity is first of all, in the language of English economists,
“any thing necessary, useful or pleasant in life,” an object of human
wants, a means of existence in the broadest sense of the word. This
property of commodities to serve as use-values coincides with their
natural palpable existence. Wheat e. g. is a distinct use-value
differing from the use-values cotton, glass, paper, etc. Use-value has
a value only in use and is realized only in the process of consumption.
The same use-value may be utilized in various ways. But the extent of
its possible applications is circumscribed by its distinct properties.
Furthermore, it is thus limited not only qualitatively but also
quantitatively. According to their natural properties the various
use-values have different measures, such as a bushel of wheat, a quire
of paper, a yard of linen, etc.

Whatever the social form of wealth may be, use-values always have a
substance of their own, independent of that form. One can not tell by
the taste of wheat whether it has been raised by a Russian serf, a
French peasant, or an English capitalist. Although the object of social
wants and, therefore, mutually connected in society, use-values do
not bear any marks of the relations of social production. Suppose, we
have a commodity whose use-value is that of a diamond. We can not tell
by looking at the diamond that it is a commodity. When it serves as a
use-value, aesthetic or mechanical, on the breast of a harlot, or in
the hand of a glasscutter, it is a diamond and not a commodity. It is
the necessary prerequisite of a commodity to be a use-value, but it is
immaterial to the use-value whether it is a commodity or not. Use-value
in this indifference to the nature of its economic destination, i. e.
use-value as such lies outside the sphere of investigation of political
economy.[3] It falls within the sphere of the latter only in so far
as it forms its own economic destination. It forms the material basis
which directly underlies a definite economic relation called _exchange
value_.

Exchange-value appears at first sight as a _quantitative relation_,
as a proportion in which use-values are exchanged for one another. In
such a relation they constitute equal exchangeable quantities. Thus,
a volume of Propercius and eight ounces of snuff may represent the
same exchange value, in spite of the dissimilar use-values of tobacco
and elegy. As exchange-value, one kind of use-value is worth as much
as another kind, if only taken in right proportion. The exchange
value of a palace can be expressed in a certain number of boxes of
shoe-blacking. On the contrary, London manufacturers of shoe-blacking
have expressed the exchange value of their many boxes of blacking,
in palaces. Thus, entirely apart from their natural forms and
without regard to the specific kind of wants for which they serve as
use-values, commodities in certain quantities equal each other, take
each other’s place in exchange, pass as equivalents, and in spite of
their variegated appearance, represent the same entity.

Use-values are primarily means of existence. These means of existence,
however, are themselves products of social life, the result of expended
human vital power, _materialized labor_. As the embodiment of social
labor, all commodities are the crystallization of the same substance.
Let us now consider the nature of this substance, i. e., of labor,
which is expressed in exchange value.

Let one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat and
twenty yards of silk represent equal exchange values. As equivalents,
in which the qualitative difference between their use-values has been
eliminated, they represent equal volumes of the same kind of labor.
The labor which is equally embodied in all of them must be uniform,
homogeneous, simple labor. It matters as little in the case of labor
whether it be embodied in gold, iron, wheat, or silk, as it does in
the case of oxygen, whether it appears in the rust of iron, in the
atmosphere, in the juice of a grape, or in the blood of a human being.
But the digging of gold, the extraction of iron from a mine, the
raising of wheat and the weaving of silk are so many kinds of labor,
differing in quality. As a matter of fact, what in reality appears as a
difference in use-values, is in the process of production, a difference
in the work creating those use-values. Just as labor, which creates
exchange value, is indifferent to the material of use-values, so it
is to the special form of labor itself. Furthermore, the different
use-values are the products of the work of different individuals,
consequently the result of various kinds of labor differing
individually from one another. But as exchange values, they represent
the same homogeneous labor, i. e., labor from which the individuality
of the workers is eliminated. Labor creating exchange value is,
therefore, _abstract general labor_.

If one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat, and twenty
yards of silk are exchange values of equal magnitude or equivalents;
then one ounce of gold, half a ton of iron, three bushels of wheat
and five yards of silk are exchange values of different magnitudes,
and this quantitative difference is the only difference of which
they are capable as exchange values. As exchange values of different
magnitudes, they represent greater or smaller quantities of that
simple, homogeneous, abstract, general labor, which forms the substance
of exchange value. The question arises, how are these quantities to be
measured? Or, rather what constitutes the substance of labor, which
makes it capable of quantitative measurement, since the quantitative
differences of commodities in their capacity of exchange values are
but quantitative differences of labor embodied in them. Just as motion
is measured by time, so is labor measured by _labor-time_. Given
the quality of labor, the difference in its duration is the only
property by which it can be distinguished. As labor-time, labor has
the same standard of measurement as the natural time measures, viz.,
hours, days, weeks, etc. Labor-time is the vital substance of labor,
independent of its form, composition, individuality; it is its vital
substance quantitatively, having at the same time its own inherent
measure. Labor-time embodied in the use-values of commodities is the
substance which makes exchange values and, therefore, commodities of
them and at the same time serves to measure definite quantities of
their value. Corresponding quantities of different use-values, in which
the same quantity of labor-time is embodied, are equivalents; or, to
put it in another form, all use-values are equivalents when taken in
proportions containing the same quantity of expended, materialized
labor-time. As exchange values, all commodities are but definite
measures of _congealed labor-time_.

To understand how exchange value is determined by labor-time, the
following main points must be kept in mind: The reduction of labor to
simple labor, devoid of any quality, so to speak; the specific ways
and means by which exchange―value-creating, i. e., commodity producing
labor becomes _social labor_; finally, the difference between labor as
the producer of use-values, and labor as the creator of exchange values.

In order to measure commodities by the labor-time contained in them,
the different kinds of labor must be reduced to uniform, homogeneous,
simple labor, in short, to labor which is qualitatively the same, and,
therefore, differs only in quantity.

This reduction appears to be an abstraction; but it is an abstraction
which takes place daily in the social process of production. The
conversion of all commodities into labor-time is no greater abstraction
nor a less real process than the chemical reduction of all organic
bodies to air. Labor, thus measured by time, does not appear in reality
as the labor of different individuals. but on the contrary, the
various working individuals rather appear as mere organs of labor; or,
in so far as labor is represented by exchange values, it may be defined
as human labor in general. This abstraction of human labor in general
virtually exists in the average labor which the average individual
of a given society can perform―a certain productive expenditure of
human muscles, nerves, brain, etc. It is unskilled labor to which the
average individual can be put and which he has to perform in one way
or another. The character of this average labor varies in different
countries and at different stages of civilization, but appears fixed in
a particular society. Unskilled labor constitutes the bulk of all labor
performed in capitalist society, as may be seen from all statistics.

It is obvious that if A spends six hours in the production of iron
and six hours on linen, and B also produces iron during six hours and
linen during another six hours, it is but a different application
of _the same_ labor time that would be expended, if A produced iron
during twelve hours, while B worked twelve hours on linen. But how
about skilled labor which rises above the level of average labor by its
higher intensity, by its greater specific gravity? This kind of labor
resolves itself into unskilled labor composing it; it is simple labor
of a higher intensity, so that one day of skilled labor, e. g., may
equal three days of unskilled labor. This is not the place to consider
the laws regulating this reduction. It is clear, however, that such
reduction does take place, for, as exchange value, the product of the
most skilled labor is, when taken in a certain proportion, equivalent
to the product of unskilled average labor, or equal to a definite
quantity of that unskilled labor.

The determination of exchange-value by means of labor-time implies,
further, the fact that an equal quantity of labor is embodied in any
given commodity, e. g., a ton of iron, no matter whether it is the work
of A or B, that is to say, various individuals expend an equal amount
of labor-time for the production of the same use-value of a given
quality and quantity. It is thus assumed that the labor-time contained
in a commodity is the labor-time _necessary_ for its production, i. e.,
it is the labor-time which is required for the production of another
specimen of the same commodity under the same general conditions of
production.

The conditions of labor, which creates exchange value, as shown by the
analysis of the latter, are _social conditions_ of labor or conditions
of _social labor_. Social, not in the ordinary, but in a special
sense. It is a specific form of the social process. The homogeneous
simplicity of labor means first of all _equality_ of the labors of
various individuals, a reciprocal relation of equality of their labors
determined by the actual reduction of all kinds of labor to uniform
labor. The labor of every individual, as far as it is expressed in
exchange value possesses this social character of equality and finds
expression in exchange value only in so far as it is a relation of
equality with the labor of all other individuals.

Furthermore, the labor-time of a single individual is directly
expressed in exchange value as _universal labor-time_, and this
_universal character_ of individual labor is the manifestation of its
_social character_. The labor-time represented by exchange value is the
labor-time of an individual, but of an individual undistinguished from
other individuals in so far as they perform the same labor; therefore,
the time required by one individual for the production of a certain
commodity is the _necessary_ labor-time which any other individual
would have to spend on the production of the same commodity. It is the
labor-time of an individual, _his_ labor-time, but only as labor-time
common to all, regardless as to which particular individual’s
labor-time it is. As universal labor-time it is represented in a
universal product, in a _universal equivalent_, in a definite quantity
of materialized labor-time: the latter is indifferent as to the
particular form of use-value in which it appears directly as the
product of an individual, and may be turned at will into any other
form of use-value to represent the product of any other individual.
Only as such a _universal_ quantity, is it a _social_ quantity. In
order to result in exchange value, the labor of an individual must
be turned into a _universal equivalent_, i. e., the labor-time of an
individual must be expressed as universal labor-time, or universal
labor-time as that of an individual. It is the same as though different
individuals had put together their labor-time and contributed the
different quantities of labor-time at their common disposal in the form
of different use-values. The labor-time of the individual is thus,
in fact, the labor time which society requires for the production of
a certain use-value, i. e., for the satisfaction of a certain want.
But the question that interests us here is as to the specific form in
which labor acquires a social character. Let us suppose that a certain
quantity of labor-time of a spinner is realized in 100 lbs. of yarn.
Suppose 100 yards of linen, the product of the weaver, represent the
same quantity of labor-time. Inasmuch as these two products represent
equal quantities of universal labor-time and, hence, are equivalents of
_every_ use-value which contains the same amount of labor-time, they
are also equivalent to each other. Only because the labor-time of the
spinner and that of the weaver take the form of universal labor-time
and their products appear as universal equivalents, is the labor of
the weaver realized for the spinner, and that of the spinner, for the
weaver, the labor of one takes the place of the labor of the other, i.
e., the social character of their labors is realized for both. Quite
different it was under the patriarchal system of production, when
spinner and weaver lived under the same roof, when the female members
of the family did the spinning, and the male members did the weaving to
supply the wants of their own family; then yarn and linen were _social_
products, spinning and weaving were _social_ labor within the limits of
the family. But their social character did not manifest itself in the
fact that yarn, as a universal equivalent, could be exchanged for linen
as a universal equivalent, or that one was exchanged for another, as
identical and equivalent expressions of the same universal labor-time.
It was rather the family organization with its natural division of
labor that impressed its peculiar social stamp on the product of
labor. Or, let us take the services and payments in kind of the Middle
Ages. It was the specific kind of labor performed by each individual in
its natural form, the particular and not the universal aspect of labor,
that constituted then the social tie. Or, let us finally take labor
carried on in common in its primitive natural form, as we find it at
the dawn of history of all civilized races.[4] It is clear that in this
case labor does not acquire its social character from the fact that the
labor of the individual takes on the abstract form of universal labor
or that his product assumes the form of a universal equivalent. The
very nature of production under a communal system makes it impossible
for the labor of the individual to be private labor and his product
to be a private product; on the contrary, it makes individual labor
appear as the direct function of a member of a social organism. On the
contrary, labor, which is expressed in exchange value, at once appears
as the labor of a separate individual. It becomes social labor only
by taking on the form of its direct opposite, the form of abstract
universal labor.

Labor, which creates exchange value, is, finally, characterized by the
fact that even the social relations of men appear in the reversed form
of a social relation of things. Only in so far as two use-values are
in a mutual relation of exchange values does the labor of different
persons possess the common property of being identical universal labor.
Hence, if it be correct to say that exchange value is a relation
between persons,[5] it must be added that it is a relation disguised
under a material cover. Just as a pound of iron and a pound of gold
represent the _same_ weight in spite of their different physical and
chemical properties, so do two use-values, as commodities containing
the same quantity of labor-time, represent the _same exchange value_.
Exchange value thus appears as the natural social destination of
use-values, a property which they possess by virtue of being things and
in consequence of which they are exchanged for one another in definite
proportions, or form equivalents, just as chemical elements combine in
certain proportions, forming chemical equivalents. It is only through
the habit of everyday life that we come to think it perfectly plain and
commonplace, that a social relation of production should take on the
form of a thing, so that the relation of persons in their work appears
in the form of a mutual relation between things, and between things
and persons.

In commodities this mystification is as yet very simple. It is more
or less plain to everybody that a relation of commodities as exchange
values is nothing but a mutual relation between persons in their
productive activity. This semblance of simplicity disappears in higher
productive relations. All the illusions in regard to the monetary
system are due to the fact that money is not regarded as something
representing a social relation of production, but as a product of
nature endowed with certain properties. The modern economists who sneer
at the illusions of the monetary system, betray the same illusion
as soon as they have to deal with higher economic forms, as, e. g.,
capital.[6] It breaks forth in their confession of naive surprise, when
what they have just thought to have defined with great difficulty as a
thing suddenly appears as a social relation and then reappears to tease
them again as a thing, before they have barely managed to define it as
a social relation.

Since the exchange value of commodities is, in fact, nothing but a
mutual relation of the labors of individuals―labors which are similar
and universal―nothing but a material expression of a specific social
form of labor, it is a tautology to say that labor is the _only_
source of exchange value and consequently of wealth, in so far as the
latter consists of exchange values. Similarly, it is a tautology to
say that matter in its natural state has no exchange value, because
it does not contain any labor, and that exchange value as such does
not contain matter. But when William Petty calls “labor the father and
earth the mother of wealth,” or when Bishop Berkeley asks “whether
the four elements and man’s labour therein, be not the true source of
wealth,”[7] or when the American, Thomas Cooper puts it popularly:
“Take away from a piece of bread the labour bestowed by the baker on
the flour, by the miller on the grain brought to him, by the farmer
in ploughing, sowing, tending, gathering, threshing, cleaning and
transporting the seed, and what will remain? A few grains of grass,
growing wild in the woods, and unfit for any human purpose”[8]―then all
these views do not refer to abstract labor as the source of exchange
value, but to concrete labor as the source of material wealth; in
short, to labor in so far as it produces use-values. In assuming
that a commodity has use-value we assume the special usefulness
and distinct fitness of the labor absorbed by it, but that is all
there is to the view of labor as useful labor from the standpoint of
commodity. Considering bread as a use-value, we are interested in its
properties as an article of food and not at all in the different kinds
of labor of the farmer, miller, baker, etc. If by some invention
nineteen-twentieths of this labor could be saved, the loaf of bread
would still render the same service as before. If it fell ready-made
from the sky it would not lose a single atom of its use-value. While
labor which creates exchange value is realized in the equality of
commodities as universal equivalents, labor as a productive activity
with a useful purpose is realized in the endless variety of use-values
created by it. While labor which creates exchange values is _abstract_,
_universal_ and _homogeneous_, labor which produces use-values is
concrete and special and is made up of an endless variety of kinds of
labor according to the way in which and the material to which it is
applied.

It is wrong to speak of labor in so far as it is applied to the
production of use-values as of _the only_ source of wealth, namely,
the material wealth produced by it. Being an activity intended to
adapt materials to this or that purpose, it requires matter as a
prerequisite. In different use-values the proportion between labor
and raw material varies greatly, but use-value always has a natural
substratum. Labor, as an activity, directed to the adaptation of raw
material in one form or another, is a natural condition of human
existence, a condition of exchange of matter between man and nature,
independent of all social forms. On the contrary, labor producing
exchange value is a specifically social form of labor. Tailoring, e.
g., in its material manifestation as a distinct productive activity,
produces a coat, but not the exchange value of the coat. The latter
is produced not by the labor of the tailor as such, but by abstract
universal labor, and that belongs to a certain organization of society
which has not been brought about by the tailor. Thus, the women under
the ancient system of house industry made coats without producing the
exchange value of the coats. Labor as a source of material wealth was
known to Moses, the legislator, as well as to Adam Smith, the customs
official.[9]

Let us consider now some propositions which follow from the
determination of exchange value by labor-time.

As a use-value, every commodity owes its usefulness to itself. Wheat,
e. g., serves as an article of food. A machine saves labor to a certain
extent. This function of a commodity by virtue of which it serves only
as use-value, as an article of consumption, may be called its service,
the service which it renders as use-value. But as an exchange value,
a commodity is always regarded as a result; the question in this case
is not as to the service which it renders, but as to the service[10]
which it has been rendered in its production. Thus, the exchange value
of a machine is determined not by the quantity of labor-time which it
saves, but by the quantity of labor-time which has been expended on
its own production and which is, therefore, required to produce a new
machine of the same kind.

If, therefore, the quantity of labor-time required for the production
of commodities remained constant, their exchange value would remain
the same. But the ease and the difficulty of production are constantly
changing. If the productivity of labor increases, the same use-value
will be produced in less time. If the productivity of labor declines,
more time will be required for the production of the same use-value.
Thus, the labor-time contained in a commodity or its exchange-value is
a variable quantity, increasing or diminishing in an inverse ratio to
the rise and fall of the productivity of labor. The productive power of
labor which is applied in the manufacturing industry on a predetermined
scale depends in the agricultural and extractive industries also on
natural conditions which are beyond human control. _The same labor_
will yield a greater or less output of various metals, according to
their more or less close occurrence in the earth’s crust. _The same
labor_ may be embodied in two bushels of wheat in a favorable season,
and only in one in an unfavorable season. In this case, scarcity or
abundance, as natural conditions, seem to determine the exchange value
of commodities, because they determine the productivity of certain
kinds of labor which depend upon natural conditions.

Unequal volumes of different use-value contain the same quantity of
labor-time or the same exchange value. The smaller the volume of a
use-value containing a certain quantity of labor-time as compared with
other use-values, the greater its _specific exchange-value_. If we find
that certain use-values, such as, e. g., gold, silver, copper and iron,
or wheat, rye, barley and oats, form a series of specific exchange
values which, though not retaining exactly the same numerical ratio,
still retain through widely remote epochs of civilization the same
rough proportion of relatively larger and smaller quantities, we may
draw the conclusion that the progressive development of the productive
powers of society has equally, or approximately so, affected the
labor-time necessary for the production of the various commodities.

The exchange value of a commodity is not revealed in its own use-value.
But, as the embodiment universal social labor-time, the use-value
of one commodity bears a certain ratio to the use-values of other
commodities. Thus, the exchange value of one commodity is manifested
in the use-values of other commodities. An equivalent is, in fact, the
exchange value of one commodity expressed in the use-value of another
commodity. If I say, e. g., that one yard of linen is worth two pounds
of coffee, then the exchange value of linen is expressed in terms of
the use-value of coffee, viz., in a certain quantity of that use-value.
This ratio being given, I can express the value of any quantity of
linen in coffee. It is clear that the exchange value of one commodity,
say linen, is not confined to the ratio of any one commodity, e. g.
coffee, as its equivalent. The quantity of universal labor-time which
is represented in one yard of linen is at the same time embodied in
an endless variety of volumes of use-values of all other commodities.
The use-value of any other commodity forms the equivalent of one yard
of linen, in the proportion in which it represents the same quantity of
labor-time as that yard of linen. The exchange value of _this single
commodity_ is, therefore, fully expressed in the endless number of
equations in which the use-values of all other commodities form its
equivalents. Not until the exchange value of a commodity is expressed
in the sum total of these equations or of the different proportions in
which one commodity is exchanged for every other commodity, does it
find an exhaustive expression as a _universal equivalent_; e. g., the
series of equations:

  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea,
  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee,
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread,
  1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico,

may be represented as follows:

1 yard of linen = 1/8 lb. of tea + 1/2 lb. of coffee + 2 lbs. of bread
+ 1-1/2 yards of calico.

Therefore, if we had before us the sum total of the equations, in
which the value of a yard of linen is exhaustively expressed, we could
represent its exchange value in the form of a series. As a matter of
fact, the series is an endless one, since the circle of commodities,
constantly expanding, can never be closed up. But while the exchange
value of one commodity is thus measured by the use-values of all other
commodities, the exchange values of all the other commodities are, in
their turn, measured by the use-value of this one commodity.[11]

If the exchange value of one yard of linen is expressed in 1/2 lb. of
tea, or 2 lbs. of coffee, or 6 yards of calico, or 8 lbs. of bread,
etc., it follows that coffee, tea, calico, bread, etc., are equal to
each other if taken in the same proportion in which they are equal to
the third article, linen; consequently, linen serves as the common
measure of their exchange values. Every commodity, as the embodiment
of universal labor-time, i. e., as a certain quantity of universal
labor-time, expresses in turn its exchange value in definite quantities
of the use-values of all other commodities, and the exchange values
of all the other commodities are, on the other hand, measured by the
use-value of this one exclusive commodity. But as an exchange value,
every commodity is at the same time the one exclusive commodity
that serves as a common measure of the exchange values of all other
commodities; and, on the other hand, it is but one of the many
commodities in the entire series of which every commodity expresses
directly its exchange value.

The value of a commodity is not affected by the number of commodities
of other kinds. But the length of the series of equations in which
its exchange value is realized does depend upon the greater or less
variety of other commodities. The series of equations in which the
value of coffee, e. g., is represented, indicates the extent to which
it is exchangeable, the limits within which it performs the function of
an exchange value. The exchange value of a commodity as an embodiment
of universal social labor-time is expressed in its equivalence to an
endless variety of use-values.

We have seen that the exchange value of a commodity varies with the
quantity of labor-time directly contained in it. Its realized exchange
value, i. e., its exchange value expressed in the use-values of other
commodities, must also depend on the proportion in which the labor-time
spent on the production of all other commodities is changing. If, e.
g., the labor-time required for the production of a bushel of wheat
remained constant, while that required for the production of all other
commodities doubled, the exchange value of a bushel of wheat expressed
in its equivalents would become half as large as before. The result
would be practically the same as if the amount of time necessary for
the production of one bushel of wheat had been reduced by one-half,
and that required for all other commodities had remained unchanged.
The value of commodities is determined by the proportion in which they
can be produced in the same labor-time. In order to see what possible
changes this proportion may undergo, let us take two commodities, A and
B.

_First case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodity B remain unchanged. In that case the exchange value of A,
expressed in terms of B, rises and falls with the rise and fall of the
labor-time required for the production of A.

_Second case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodity A remain constant. Then the exchange value of A, expressed in
terms of B, falls and rises in an inverse ratio with the rise and fall
of the labor-time required for the production of B.

_Third case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of
commodities A and B rise and fall in equal proportion. Then the
expression of equivalence of A and B remains unchanged. If through some
cause the productivity of all kinds of labor were to decline uniformly,
so that the production of all commodities would require an equally
increased quantity of labor-time, then the value of all commodities
would rise, though the expression of their exchange values would remain
unchanged, and the actual wealth of society would decrease, because
it would have to expend more labor-time on the production of the same
stock of use-values.

_Fourth case._ Let the labor-time required for the production of A and
B rise and fall, but not uniformly; that is to say, the labor-time
required for the production of A may rise, while that required for B
may fall, or vice versa. All of which can be reduced to the simple
case where the labor-time required for the production of one commodity
remains unchanged, while that required for the other rises or falls.

The exchange value of any commodity is expressed in the use-value of
any other commodity, be it in integral units or in fractions thereof.
As exchange value, every commodity is capable of subdivision, like
the labor-time embodied in it. The equivalence of commodities is
independent of their physical divisibility as use-values, just as the
sum of the exchange values of commodities is indifferent to the change
of form which use-values have to undergo when converted into a _single_
new commodity.

So far we have considered commodities from a twofold point of view,
as use-values and exchange values alternately. But a commodity as such
is a direct combination of use-value and exchange value; and it is a
commodity only in relation to other commodities. The _actual_ relation
between commodities constitutes the _process of their exchange_. It is
a social process participated in by individuals independent of each
other but the part they take in it is that of owners of commodities
only. Their mutual relations are those of their commodities, and thus
they really appear as conscious factors of the process of exchange.

A commodity _is_ a use-value, wheat, linen, a diamond, a machine,
etc., but as a commodity it is, at the same time, _not_ a use-value.
If it were a use-value for its owner, i. e., a direct means for the
satisfaction of his own wants, then it would not be a commodity. To him
it is rather _a non-use-value_; it is merely the material depository of
exchange-value, or simply a _means of exchange_; as an active bearer of
exchange value, use-value becomes a means of exchange. To the owner it
is a use-value only in so far as it constitutes exchange value.[12]

It has yet _to become_ a use-value, viz., to others. Not being a
use-value to its owner, it is a use-value to the owners of other
commodities. If it is not, then the labor expended on it was useless
labor, and the result of that labor is not a commodity. On the other
hand, the commodity must become a use-value _to the owner himself_,
because his means of existence lie outside of it in the use-values of
commodities not belonging to him. In order to become a use-value, the
commodity must meet the particular want of which it is the means of
satisfaction. Use-values of commodities are thus _realized_ use-values
through a universal change of hands by passing from the hands in which
they were held as means of exchange into those where they become use
values. Only through this universal transfer of commodities does the
labor contained in them become useful labor. In this process of their
mutual interchange as use-values, commodities do not acquire any new
economic forms. On the contrary, even the form which marked them as
commodities disappears. Bread, e. g., by changing hands from the baker
to the consumer does not change its identity as bread. On the contrary,
it is only the consumer that begins to regard it as a use-value, as a
certain article of food, while in the hands of the baker it was only
the bearer of an economic relation, a palpable yet transcendental
object. Thus, the only change of form that commodities undergo while
becoming use-values, consists in the fact that they cease to be, as
a matter of form, non-use-values to their owners, and use-values to
those who do not own them. To become use-values commodities must be
universally alienated; they must enter the sphere of exchange; but
they are subject to exchange in their capacity of exchange values.
Hence, in order to be realized as use-values, they must be realized as
exchange values.

While the single commodity appeared from the standpoint of use-value as
something independent, as exchange value it was regarded first of all
in its relation to all other commodities. This relation was, however,
merely theoretical, imaginary. It becomes real only in the process of
exchange. On the other hand, a commodity _is_ an exchange value in so
far as a certain quantity of labor-time has been expended on it, and
it consequently represents _materialized labor-time_. But of itself it
is only materialized individual labor-time of a particular kind, and
not _universal_ labor-time. Therefore, it _is not_ directly an exchange
value, but must first _become_ such. First of all, it is an embodiment
of universal labor-time only in so far as it represents labor-time
applied to a definite useful purpose, i. e., when it represents a
use-value. This was the material condition under which alone labor-time
contained in commodities was regarded as universal social labor.
Thus, while a commodity can become a use-value only after it has been
realized as an exchange value, it can, on the other hand, be realized
as an exchange value only if it proves to be a use-value in the process
of alienation.

A commodity can be alienated as a use-value only to one whom it
serves as a use-value, i. e., as a means of satisfying a certain
want. On the other hand, it is exchanged for another commodity, or,
if we put ourselves on the side of the owner of the other commodity,
it, too, can be alienated, i. e., be realized, only if brought in
contact with that particular want of which it is the object. In the
universal exchange of commodities as _use-values_ the basis for
their mutual relations is in their material difference as distinct
objects which satisfy different wants by their specific properties.
But as mere use-values, they are indifferent to each other, and
are incommensurable. As use-values they can be exchanged only with
reference to certain wants. They are exchangeable only as equivalents,
and they are equivalents only as equal quantities of materialized
labor-time, so that all regard to their natural properties as
use-values and therefore to the relation of the commodities to
particular wants is eliminated. On the contrary, a commodity is
realized as an exchange value by replacing as an equivalent any
definite quantity of any other commodity, regardless of whether it
is a use-value for the owner of the other commodity or not. But to
the owner of the other commodity it is a commodity only in so far
as it is a use-value to him, and it becomes an exchange value to
its owner only in so far as it is a commodity to that other person.
Thus, the same relation appears as a proportion between commodities
as magnitudes of the same denomination, but differing qualitatively;
or, as an expression of their equivalence as embodiments of universal
labor-time, and, at the same time, as a relation of qualitatively
different objects, of use-values intended for the satisfaction of
particular wants, in short, a relation in which they are distinguished
as actual use-values. But this equivalence and non-equivalence mutually
exclude each other. Thus we have before us not only a vicious circle
of problems in which the solution of one implies that of the other, but
a combination of contradicting claims, since the fulfillment of one is
directly connected with that of its opposite.

The process of exchange of commodities must result both in the
unfolding and in the solution of these contradictions, neither of
which, however, can appear in that process in this simple way. We
have only observed how commodities are mutually related to each other
as use-values, i. e., how they appear as use-values _within_ the
process of exchange. The exchange-value, on the contrary, as we have
considered it so far, appeared as an abstraction formed in our own
minds, or―if we may so put it―in the mind of the individual owner
of commodities, which lie stored in his warehouse as use-values,
and weigh upon his conscience as exchange values. In the process of
exchange, however, commodities must be not only use-values, but also
exchange values to one another, and that should appear as their own
mutual relation. The difficulty which we first encountered was that a
commodity must be first alienated and delivered to its purchasers as
a use-value, in order to appear as an exchange value, as materialized
labor, while on the other hand its alienation as use-value implies
its being an exchange value. But let us assume that this difficulty
has been overcome. Suppose the commodity has divested itself of its
use-value, and has thereby fulfilled the material condition of being
socially useful labor, instead of a particular labor of an individual.
In that case, the commodity must become an exchange value, a universal
equivalent, an embodiment of universal labor-time for all other
commodities in the process of exchange, and thus, leaving behind its
limited role of a particular use-value, acquire the ability to be
directly represented in all use-values as its equivalents. But every
commodity is _just such_ a commodity, appearing as a direct incarnation
of universal labor-time by divesting itself of its particular
use-value. On the other hand, however, commodities confront each other
in the process of exchange as particular commodities, as the labor
of private individuals embodied in particular use-values. Universal
labor-time is itself an abstraction, which, as such, does not exist for
commodities.

Let us examine the series of equations in which the exchange value of a
commodity finds its concrete expression, e. g.:

  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee.
  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea.
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread, etc.

These equations simply signify that equal quantities of universal
social labor-time are embodied in one yard of linen, two pounds
of coffee, half a pound of tea, etc. But as a matter of fact the
individual labors which are represented in these particular use-values,
become universal, and, in that form, also social labor, only when they
are actually exchanged for one another in proportion to the labor-time
contained in them. Social labor-time exists in these commodities in
a latent state, so to say, and is first revealed in the process of
exchange. We do not proceed from the labor of individuals as social
labor, but, on the contrary, from special labor of private individuals
which appears as universal social labor only by divesting itself of
its original character in the process of exchange. Universal social
labor is, therefore, no ready-made assumption, but a growing result.
And thus we are confronted with a new difficulty, that on the one
hand commodities must enter the process of exchange as embodiments of
universal labor-time, while, on the other hand, this embodiment of the
labor-time of individuals as social labor-time is itself a result of
the process of exchange.

Every commodity becomes an exchange value by divesting itself of its
use-value, or of its original nature. The commodity must therefore
assume a double capacity in the process of exchange. But that second
capacity of exchange value can appear only in the shape of another
commodity, because only commodities confront each other in the process
of exchange. How is a particular commodity to represent directly
_materialized universal_ labor-time, or―to put it differently―how is
individual labor-time, which is embodied in a particular commodity to
be made directly universal in character? The concrete expression of the
exchange value of a commodity, i. e., of every commodity as a universal
equivalent, is represented in an endless series of equations, such as:

  1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee.
  1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea.
  1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread.
  1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico.
  1 yard of linen = etc.

The above form is theoretical in so far as commodities are only
_thought of_ as definite quantities of materialized universal
labor-time. But the capacity of a particular commodity to serve as a
universal equivalent from a mere abstraction becomes a _social_ result
of the process of exchange by a simple inversion of the above series of
equations, viz.:

  2 lbs. of coffee  = 1 yard of linen.
  1/2 lb. of tea    = 1 yard of linen.
  8 lbs. of bread   = 1 yard of linen.
  6 yards of calico = 1 yard of linen.

While coffee, tea, bread, calico, in short, all commodities express
in linen the labor-time contained in them, the exchange value of
linen, on the other hand, unfolds itself in all other commodities as
its equivalents, and the labor-time embodied in it becomes direct
universal labor-time, which is equally expressed in different volumes
of all other commodities. Linen thus becomes the _universal equivalent_
through the _universal action_ of all other commodities upon it.
As exchange value, every commodity served as a measure of value of
all other commodities. Now, on the contrary, since all commodities
measure their exchange values by means of a particular commodity,
this excluded commodity becomes the special expression of exchange
value, as a universal equivalent. At the same time, the endless
series of equations in which the exchange value of every commodity
was expressed, is reduced to one single equation consisting of two
members. The equation 2 lbs. of coffee = 1 yard of linen now fully
expresses the exchange value of coffee, for in this expression a yard
of linen appears as the direct equivalent of a definite quantity
of every other commodity. Thus, within the sphere of exchange all
commodities are or appear to each other as exchange values in the
form of linen. The proposition that commodities, as exchange values,
are to each other as different quantities of materialized universal
labor-time, may now be worded to the effect that commodities, as
exchange values, represent nothing but different quantities of _the
same_ article, linen. Universal labor-time thus assumes the aspect of
a distinct thing, as a commodity existing along with and outside of
all other commodities. At the same time the equation 2 lbs. of coffee
= 1 yard of linen, in which one commodity appears as the exchange
value of another, is yet to be realized. Only by being alienated as
use-value―which depends upon whether it proves to be in the process
of exchange the object of a certain want―does the commodity actually
transform its existence as coffee into the existence as linen and
thus takes on the form of a universal equivalent and becomes, indeed,
an exchange value for all other commodities. Conversely, since all
commodities are turned into linen by being alienated as use-values,
linen becomes the converted form of all other commodities, and only as
a result of this transformation of all other commodities into it, it
becomes the direct _embodiment of universal labor-time_, i. e., the
product of universal exchange and of the elimination of individual
labor. If commodities thus assume a twofold character in order to
appear as exchange values to each other, the commodity which has been
singled out as the universal equivalent becomes, on the other hand, a
use-value in two ways. Besides its special use-value as a particular
commodity, it assumes a universal use-value. This latter kind of
use-value constitutes its special feature, emanating as it does,
from the specific part which the commodity plays as a result of the
universal relation which all other commodities bear toward it in the
process of exchange. The use-value of every commodity as an object of
a particular want, has a different value in different hands, e. g., it
has a different value in the hands of the one who disposes of it, than
in those of the one who acquires it. But the commodity singled out as
the universal equivalent, is now an object of a universal want arising
from the very process of exchange, and it has the same use-value to
everybody, viz., that of serving as the depository of exchange value,
of being a universal means of exchange. Thus we find in one commodity
the solution of the contradiction which is inherent in commodity as
such, namely, of being at one and the same time a particular use-value
and a universal equivalent, and, therefore, a use-value for everybody
or universal use-value. Thus, while all other commodities express their
exchange value in the form of an ideal equation with the excluded
commodity―an equation yet to be realized―the use-value of the special
commodity, although real, appears in the process itself as a mere
form which is yet to be realized through transformation into actual
use-values. Originally the commodity appeared simply as commodity, as
universal labor-time embodied in a particular use-value. In the process
of exchange, all commodities are related to the one excluded commodity
as to a simple commodity, one which appears as the embodiment of
universal labor-time in a particular use-value. Thus, _particular_
commodities become related to one particular commodity as a universal
commodity.[13] In that manner the mutual relations of possessors of
commodities based on the fact that they regard their labor as universal
social labor, takes on the aspect of their relations to commodities as
exchange values; and the mutual relation of commodities as exchange
values appears in the process of exchange as the relation of all of
them to one particular commodity as to a specially adopted means of
expression of their exchange value; again, from the point of view of
that particular commodity the above relation appears as its specific
relation to all other commodities, and, therefore, as its own definite,
spontaneous, social character. The particular commodity which thus
appears as the specially adopted expression of the exchange value
of all other commodities, or the exchange value of commodities as a
particular exclusive commodity, is _money_. Money is a crystallization
of the exchange value of commodities which they themselves form in
the process of exchange. Thus, while commodities become _use-values_
to each other in the process of exchange by casting off all definite
forms and entering into mutual relations in their direct material
shape, they must assume a new form, viz., proceed to the formation of
money in order to appear as _exchange values_ to each other. Money
is not a symbol, no more than the commodity aspect of a use-value
is a symbol. That a social relation of production takes the form of
an object existing outside of individuals, and that the definite
relations into which individuals enter in the process of production
carried on in society, assume the form of specific properties of a
thing, is a perversion and by no means imaginary, but prosaically real,
mystification marking all social forms of labor which creates exchange
value. In money this mystification appears only more strikingly than in
commodities.

The necessary physical properties of the particular commodity in which
the money form of all other commodities is to be crystallized―as far
as they are directly determined by the nature of exchange value―are:
divisibility to any desired extent, homogeneity of its parts, and
uniformity of all the specimens of the commodity. As an embodiment
of universal labor-time it must be homogeneous in its structure
and capable of representing only quantitative differences. Another
necessary property is durability of its use-value, as it must last
through the process of exchange. The precious metals excel in these
qualities. Money not being a result of a scheme or agreement, but
having been produced instinctively in the process of exchange, a great
variety of more or less unsuited commodities had successively performed
its functions. At a certain stage of development of the process
of exchange, the necessity arises for a polar distribution of the
functions of exchange value and use-value among commodities, so that
one commodity e. g. should act as a medium of exchange, while another
is being alienated as a use-value. This necessity brings it about that
one or even several commodities possessing the most generally accepted
use-value, begin, incidentally at first, to play the part of money.
Even if not direct means of satisfying existing wants, their being the
most considerable material constituent part of wealth, insures to them
a more general character than to the other use-values.

Direct barter, the original natural form of exchange, represents rather
the beginning of the transformation of use-values into commodities,
than that of commodities into money. Exchange value has as yet no
form of its own, but is still directly bound up with use-value. This
is manifested in two ways. Production, in its entire organization,
aims at the creation of use-values and not of exchange values, and
it is only when their supply exceeds the measure of consumption that
use-values cease to be use-values, and become means of exchange,
i. e., commodities. At the same time, they become commodities only
within the limits of being direct use-values distributed at opposite
poles, so that the commodities to be exchanged by their possessors
must be use-values to both,―each commodity to its non-possessor. As a
matter of fact, the exchange of commodities originates not within the
primitive communities,[14] but where they end, on their borders at the
few points, where they come in contact with other communities. That is
where barter begins, and from here it strikes back into the interior
of the community, decomposing it. The various use-values which first
become commodities in the barter between different communities, such
as slaves, cattle, metals, constitute therefore in most cases the
first money within those communities themselves. We have seen how
the exchange value of a commodity is manifested the more perfectly
as exchange value, the longer the series of its equivalents or the
_greater_ the sphere of exchange of that commodity. With the gradual
expansion of barter, the increase in the number of exchanges, and
the growing diversification of the commodities drawn into exchange,
commodities develop into exchange values, which leads to the formation
of money and has a destructive effect on direct barter. The economists
are in the habit of ascribing the origin of money to the difficulties
which are encountered in the way of extensive barter, but they forget
that these difficulties arise from the development of exchange value
and from the fact that social labor becomes universal labor. E. g.,
commodities as use-values can not be subdivided at will, a property
which they should possess as exchange values. Or, a commodity belonging
to A may be a use-value to B, while the commodity belonging to B may
not have any use-value to A. Or the owners of the commodities may
need each other’s indivisible goods in unequal proportions. In other
words, under the pretence of analyzing simple barter, economists
bring out certain aspects of the contradiction which is inherent in
commodities as entities simultaneously embodying both use-value and
exchange value. On the other hand, they consistently cling to the
idea that barter is the natural form of exchange, which suffers only
from certain technical difficulties, for which money is a cunningly
devised expedient. Arguing from this perfectly superficial view, an
ingenious English economist has rightly maintained that money is
merely a material instrument like a ship or a steam-engine, but not
an expression of a social relation in the field of production and
consequently not an economic category; and that it is, therefore, wrong
to treat the subject in political economy, which really has nothing in
common with technology.[15]

The world of commodities implies the existence of a highly developed
division of labor; this division is manifested directly in the great
variety of use-values, which confront each other as particular
commodities and which embody as many different kinds of labor. The
division of labor embracing all the particular kinds of productive
occupations, is the complete expression of social labor in its material
aspect viewed as labor creating use-values. But from the standpoint of
commodities and within the process of exchange, it exists only in its
results, in the variety of the commodities themselves.

The exchange of commodities constitutes the social metabolic process,
i. e. the process in which the exchange of the special products of
private individuals is the result of certain social relations of
production into which the individuals enter in this interchange of
matter. As they develop, the mutual relations of commodities crystalize
into various aspects of the universal equivalent and thus the process
of exchange becomes at the same time the process of the formation of
money. The whole of this process which takes the form of a succession
of processes, constitutes circulation.


NOTES ON THE HISTORY OF THE THEORY OF COMMODITIES.

The analysis of commodities according to their twofold aspect of
use-value and exchange value by which the former is reduced to work
or deliberate productive activity; and the latter, to labor time or
homogeneous social labor, is the result of a century and a half of
critical study by the classical school of political economy which dates
from William Petty in England and Boisguillebert in France[16] and
closes with Ricardo in the former country and Sismondi in the latter.

Petty reduces use-value to labor, without deceiving himself as to the
natural limitation of its creative power. As regards concrete labor,
he sizes it up in the magnitude of its social aspect, as _the division
of labor_.[17] This view of the source of material wealth does not
remain more or less fruitless as in the case of his contemporary,
Hobbes, but leads up to his _Political Arithmetic_, the first form in
which Political Economy is differentiated as an independent science.

He defines exchange value, however, just as it _appears_ in the process
of exchange of commodities, viz. as money; and money he defines as
an existing commodity, gold and silver. Laboring under the ideas of
the monetary system, he declares the special branch of labor which
is devoted to the production of gold and silver as the labor which
determines exchange value. What he really means is that the labor of
members of society must produce not direct use-values, but commodities
or use-values which by means of exchange are capable of assuming the
form of gold and silver, i. e. of money, i. e. of exchange value, i.
e. of embodiments of universal labor. His example, however, shows
strikingly that the recognition of labor as the source of material
wealth by no means excludes the misconception of the particular social
form in which labor constitutes the source of exchange value.

In his turn, Boisguillebert, if not consciously, at any rate actually
reduces the exchange value of a commodity to labor-time, since he
determines “true value” (la juste valeur) by the right proportion in
which the labor-time of individuals is distributed among the several
branches of industry, and defines free competition as the social
process which determines these correct proportions. At the same time,
however, and in contrast with Petty he wages a fanatical war against
money which, by its interference, disturbs the natural equilibrium or
harmony of exchange of commodities and, like a wanton Moloch, demands
all natural wealth as sacrifice. It is true that this assault on money
was called forth by certain historic conditions. Since Boisguillebert
attacked[18] the blind destructive lust after gold which possessed
the court of Louis XIV, his tax collectors, and his nobility; on the
other hand, Petty extolled in the greed of gold the mighty impulse
which spurred on the nation in her industrial development and in her
conquest of the world-market; still, there asserts itself here a
deeper antagonism of principles which constantly recurs between true
English and true French[19] Political Economy. Boisguillebert sees,
in fact, only the material substance of wealth, its use-value, the
enjoyment[20] of it, and considers the capitalistic form of labor, i.
e. the production of use-values as commodities and the exchange of
those commodities, as the natural social form in which individual labor
attains its end. When he is, therefore, confronted with the specific
character of capitalistic wealth as in the case of money, he sees in it
the usurping interference of extraneous elements and gets into a rage
about the capitalist system of labor in one form while utopian-like
he praises it in another.[21] Boisguillebert furnishes us with proof
that one may treat labor-time as the measure of value of commodities,
and at the same time confound labor embodied in the exchange value of
commodities and measured by time, with the direct natural activity of
individuals.

The first sensible analysis of exchange value as labor-time, made so
clear as to seem almost commonplace, is to be found in the work of
a man of the New World where the bourgeois relations of production
imported together with their representatives sprouted rapidly in a
soil which made up its lack of historical traditions with a surplus of
humus. That man was Benjamin Franklin, who formulated the fundamental
law of modern political economy[22] in his first work which he wrote
when a mere youth and published in 1721.

He declares it necessary to look for another measure of value than
precious metals. That measure is labor. “By labor may the value of
silver be measured as well as other things. As, suppose one man
employed to raise corn, while another is digging and refining silver;
at the year’s end, or at any other period of time, the complete produce
of corn, and that of silver, are the natural price of each other; and
if one be twenty bushels, and the other twenty ounces, then an ounce
of that silver is worth the labor of raising a bushel of that corn.
Now if by the discovery of some nearer, more easy or plentiful mines,
a man may get forty ounces of silver as easily as formerly he did
twenty, and the same labor is still required to raise twenty bushels
of corn, then two ounces of silver will be worth no more than the same
labor of raising one bushel of corn, and that bushel of corn will be
as cheap at two ounces, as it was before at one, _ceteris paribus_.
Thus the riches of a country are to be valued by the quantity of labor
its inhabitants are able to purchase.”[23] Thus Franklin regards
labor-time from the one-sided economic point of view, as the measure
of value. The transformation of actual products into exchange values
is self-evident with him and the only question is as to finding a
quantitative measure of value. “Trade,” says he, “in general being
nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all
things is, as I have said before, most justly measured by labour.”[24]
Substitute the word “work” for “labor” in the above statement, and
the confusion of labor in one form and labor in another form becomes
at once apparent. Since trade consists e. g. in the exchange of the
respective labors of the shoemaker, miner, spinner, painter, etc., does
it follow that the value of shoes is most justly measured by the work
of a painter? On the contrary, Franklin meant that the value of shoes,
mining products, yarn, paintings, etc., is determined by abstract labor
which possesses no particular qualities and can, therefore, be measured
only quantitatively.[25] But since he does not develop the idea
that labor contained in exchange value is abstract universal labor
which assumes the form of social labor as a result of the universal
alienation of the products of individual labor, he necessarily fails to
recognize in money the direct embodiment of this alienated labor. For
that reason he sees no inner connection between money and labor which
creates exchange value, and considers money merely as an instrument
introduced from outside into the sphere of exchange for purposes of
technical convenience.[26] Franklin’s analysis of exchange value did
not exert any direct influence on the general trend of science, because
he discussed only special questions of political economy whenever there
was a definite practical occasion for it.

The contrast between useful work and labor which creates exchange
value agitated all Europe during the eighteenth century in the form of
this question: what particular kind of labor constitutes the source
of bourgeois wealth? It was thus assumed that not every kind of labor
which is realized in use-values or yields certain products does
thereby directly create wealth. With the physiocrats, however, as well
as with their opponents, the burning question was not, what kind of
labor creates _value_, but which is it that creates _surplus value_.
They approached the problem in its complicated form before they had
solved it in its elementary form; such is the historical course of
all sciences leading them by a labyrinth of intersecting paths to the
real starting points. Unlike other builders, science not only erects
castles in the air, but constructs separate stories of the building,
before it has laid the foundation. Without dwelling any longer on the
physiocrats and omitting quite a number of Italian economists who in
some more or less ingenious ideas came close to a correct analysis
of the nature of commodity,[27] we pass at once to the first Briton
who elaborated the general system of bourgeois economics, Sir James
Steuart.[28] His idea of exchange value as well as all the abstract
categories of political economy still seem to be with him in the
process of differentiation from the material elements they represent
and therefore appear quite vague and unsettled. In one place he
determines _real value by labor-time_ (“what a workman can perform in
a day”), but immediately creates confusion by introducing the elements
of wages and raw material.[29] In another place his struggle with the
material substance of the subject he treats of is revealed even more
strikingly. He calls the material of nature contained in a commodity,
such as the silver in a silver plate, its “intrinsic worth,” while the
labor-time contained in it he calls “useful value.” The former, he says
“is ... something real in itself,” while “the value of the second must
be estimated according to the labour it has cost to produce it.... The
labour employed in the modification [of the substance] represents a
portion of a man’s time.”[30]

What distinguishes Steuart from his predecessors and followers is
his keen differentiation between specifically social labor which is
represented in exchange value, and concrete labor which produces
use-values. Labor, he says, which through its alienation creates
a universal equivalent, I call _industry_. Labor as industry he
distinguishes not only from concrete labor, but from all other social
forms of labor.[31] It is to him the capitalistic form of labor
in contrast to its antique and mediaeval forms. He is especially
interested in the difference between capitalistic and feudal labor, of
which he had observed the latter in its decaying forms both in Scotland
and on his extensive travels over the continent. Steuart knew, of
course, very well that products took on the form of commodities and
commodities, the form of money in precapitalistic epochs as well; but
he proves conclusively that it is only in the capitalistic period of
production that the commodity becomes the elementary and fundamental
form of wealth, and alienation [of commodities], the ruling form of
acquisition and that consequently labor creating exchange value is
specifically capitalistic in its character.[32]

After different forms of concrete labor, such as agriculture,
manufacture, navigation, trade, etc., had each in turn been declared
the true source of wealth, Adam Smith proclaimed labor in general,
and namely in its general social form of _division of labor_, to be
the only source of material wealth or use-values. While ignoring in
connection with the latter the part played by nature, he is troubled
by it when he comes to deal with purely social wealth i. e. exchange
value. To be sure, Adam determines the value of a commodity by the
labor-time contained in it, but relegates the actual application of
the principle to pre-Adamic times. In other words, what seems to him
true from the standpoint of simple commodity, ceases to be clear as
soon as the higher and more complex forms of capital, wage-labor,
rent, etc. take its place. This he expresses by saying, that the value
of commodities used to be measured by labor-time in the paradise
lost of bourgeois society, in which men dealt with each other not
as capitalists, wage-workers, landlords, tenants, usurers, etc., but
merely as plain producers of commodities which they exchanged. He
constantly confuses the determination of the value of commodities by
the labor-time contained in them with the determination of their value
by the value of labor. He becomes confused in working out the details
and fails to see the objective equalization of different kinds of labor
which the social process forcibly carries out, mistaking it for the
subjective equality of the labors of individuals.[33] The transition
from concrete labor to labor creating exchange value, i. e. to labor in
its fundamental capitalistic form he tries to derive from the _division
of labor_. Yet, while it is true that private exchange implies the
division of labor, it is false to maintain that division of labor
implies private exchange. Among the Peruvians, e. g., labor was divided
to an extraordinary extent, although there was no private exchange, no
exchange of products, as commodities.

Contrary to Adam Smith, David Ricardo elaborated with great clearness
the determination of the value of a commodity by labor-time and showed
that this law governs also such relations of capitalistic production
which seem to contradict it most. Ricardo confines his investigations
exclusively to the _quantitative determination of value_ and as regards
the latter he is at least conscious of the fact that the realization
of the law depends upon certain historical conditions. He says,
namely, that the determination of value by labor-time holds good for
commodities “only as can be increased in quantity by the exertion of
human industry, and on the production of which competition operates
without restraint.”[34] What he really means is that the law of value
presupposes for its full development an industrial society in which
production is carried on a large scale and free competition prevails,
i. e. the modern capitalist society. In all other respects, Ricardo
considers the capitalist form of labor as the eternal natural form of
social labor. He makes the primitive fisherman and the primitive hunter
straightway exchange their fish and game as owners of commodities, in
proportion to the labor-time embodied in these exchange values. On this
occasion he commits the anachronism of making the primitive fisherman
and primitive hunter consult the annuity tables in current use on the
London Exchange in the year 1817 in the calculation relating to their
instruments. The “parallelograms of Mr. Owen” seem to be the only form
of society outside of the bourgeois form with which he was acquainted.
Although confined within this bourgeois horizon, Ricardo analyzes the
bourgeois economy―which looks quite different to deeper insight than
it does on the surface―with such keen power of theoretical penetration
that Lord Brougham could say of him: “Mr. Ricardo seemed as if he had
dropped from another planet.”

In a direct controversy with Ricardo, Sismondi lays stress upon
the specifically social character of labor which creates exchange
value,[35] and says it is “characteristic of our economic progress” to
reduce the magnitude of value to the _necessary_ labor-time, to the
relation between the demand of society as a whole and the quantity of
labor which is sufficient to satisfy this demand.[36] Sismondi is no
more laboring under Boisguillebert’s idea, that labor which creates
exchange value is adulterated by money; but just as Boisguillebert
denounced money, so does Sismondi denounce large industrial capital.
In Ricardo political economy reached its climax, after recklessly
drawing its ultimate conclusions, while Sismondi supplemented it by
impersonating its doubts.

Since Ricardo gave to classical political economy its final shape,
having formulated and elaborated with the greatest clearness the law of
the determination of exchange value by labor-time, it is natural that
all the polemics among economists should center about him. Stripped
of its puerile[37] form this controversy comes down to the following
points:

_First_: Labor itself has exchange value, and different kinds of labor
have different exchange values. We get into a vicious circle by making
exchange value the measure of exchange value, because the measuring
exchange value needs a measure itself. This objection may be reduced
to the following problem: Given labor-time as the intrinsic measure
of exchange value, develop from that the determination of wages. The
theory of wages gives the answer to that.

_Second_: If the exchange value of a product is equal to the labor-time
contained in it, then the exchange value of one day of labor is equal
to the product of that labor. In other words, wages must be equal to
the product of labor.[38] But the very opposite is actually the case.
Ergo. this objection comes down to the following problem: How does
production, based on the determination of exchange value by labor-time
only, lead to the result that the exchange value of labor is less than
the exchange value of its product? This problem is solved by us in the
discussion of capital.

_Third_: The market price of commodities either falls below or rises
above its exchange value with the changing relations of supply and
demand. _Therefore_, the exchange value of commodities is determined by
the relation of supply and demand and not by the labor-time contained
in them. As a matter of fact, this queer conclusion merely amounts to
the question, how a market price based on exchange value can deviate
from that exchange value; or, better still, how does the law of
exchange value assert itself only in its antithesis? This problem is
solved in the theory of competition.

_Fourth_: The last and apparently the most striking objection, if
not raised in the usual form of queer examples: If exchange value
is nothing but mere labor-time contained in commodities, how can
commodities which contain no labor possess exchange-value, or in other
words, whence the exchange value of mere forces of nature? This problem
is solved in the theory of rent.




CHAPTER II.

MONEY OR SIMPLE CIRCULATION.


In a parliamentary debate on Sir Robert Peel’s Bank Act of 1844 and
1845, Gladstone remarked that not even love has made so many fools of
men as the pondering over the nature of money. He spoke of Britons to
Britons. The Dutch, on the contrary, who, from times of yore, have had,
Petty’s doubts notwithstanding, “angelical wits” for money speculation
have never lost their wits in speculations about money.

The main difficulty in the analysis of money is overcome as soon as
the evolution of money from commodity is understood. This point once
granted, it only remains to comprehend clearly the particular forms
of money, which is to some extent made difficult by the fact that all
bourgeois relations, being gilt or silver plated, have the appearance
of money relations, and money, therefore, seems to possess an endless
variety of forms, which have nothing in common with it.

In the following investigation only those forms of money are treated
of which directly grow out of the exchange of commodities; the forms
which belong to a higher stage of production, as e. g., credit money
will not be discussed here. For the sake of simplicity gold is assumed
throughout as the money commodity.


1. THE MEASURE OF VALUE.

The first process of circulation constitutes, so to say, the
theoretical preparatory process to actual circulation. To begin
with, commodities which are use-values by nature, acquire a form in
which they _appear_ in idea to each other as exchange values, as
definite quantities of incorporated _universal_ labor-time. The first
necessary step in this process is, as we have seen, the setting apart
by the commodities of a specific commodity, say _gold_, as the direct
incarnation of universal labor-time, or the universal equivalent. Let
us go back for a moment to the form in which commodities turn gold into
money.

  1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold

  1 quarter of wheat = 1 ounce of gold

  1 hundred weight of Mocca coffee = 1-1/4 ounce of gold

  1 hundred weight of potash = 1/2 ounce of gold

  1 ton of Brazil timber = 1-1/2 ounces of gold

  Y commodities = X ounces of gold

In the above series of equations iron, wheat, coffee, potash, etc.
appear to each other as embodiments, of homogeneous labor, namely,
as labor materialized in money, from which all the peculiarities of
the different kinds of concrete labor represented in the different
use-values are completely eliminated. As value they are all identical,
they are the incarnation of _the same_ labor, or _the same_ incarnation
of labor, viz., gold. As uniform embodiments of the same labor they
display only _one_ difference, a quantitative one, by appearing
as different quantities of value, because _unequal_ quantities of
labor-time are contained in their use-values. The mutual relation
of these separate commodities is that of embodiments of universal
labor-time, since they are related to universal labor-time as to an
excluded commodity, viz., gold. The same relation the development of
which causes commodities to appear to each other as exchange values,
causes the labor time contained in gold to appear as universal
labor-time, a given quantity of which is expressed in different
quantities of iron, wheat, coffee, etc,―in short, in the use-values
of all commodities, or is directly unfolded in the endless series of
commodity-equivalents. While all commodities express their exchange
values in gold, gold expresses its exchange value directly in all
commodities. While commodities assume the form of exchange value in
relation to each other, they lend to gold the form of the universal
equivalent, or of money.

Gold becomes the _measure of value_, because _all_ commodities measure
their exchange values in gold, in proportion as a certain quantity of
gold and a certain quantity of the commodity contain the same amount
of labor-time; and it is only by virtue of this function of being a
measure of value, in which capacity its own value is measured directly
in the entire series of commodity equivalents, that gold becomes
a universal equivalent or money. On the other hand, the exchange
value of all commodities is expressed in gold. In this expression,
the qualitative aspect is to be distinguished from the quantitative:
there is the exchange value of the commodity as the embodiment of the
same uniform labor-time; while the magnitude of value is exhaustively
expressed, since in the same proportion in which commodities are
equated to gold they are equated to one another. On the one hand the
_universal_ character of the labor-time contained in them is revealed;
on the other, its quantity is expressed in its golden equivalent. The
exchange value of commodities thus expressed in the form of a universal
equivalent and, moreover, as a numerical proportion of this equivalent,
in terms of one specific commodity, or represented in the form of a
series of commodities equated to one specific commodity, is PRICE.
Price is the form into which the exchange value of commodities is
converted when it _appears_ within the sphere of circulation.

By the same process by which commodities express their values in gold
prices, they turn gold into a measure of value i. e. into money. If
all of them were to measure their values in silver, wheat, or copper,
and therefore express them in the form of silver, wheat or copper
prices, then silver, wheat or copper would be measures of value and
consequently universal equivalents. In order to appear as prices in
circulation, commodities must be exchange values before they enter
circulation. Gold becomes the measure of value only because all
commodities estimate their exchange value in it.

The universality of this relation which is the result of evolution
and from which alone springs the function of gold as the measure of
value, implies however, that every single commodity is measured in
gold, in proportion to the labor-time contained in both; that the
actual common measure of the commodity and of gold is labor; or that
commodity and gold are passed for each other in direct barter as
equal exchange values. How this equalization actually takes place,
can not be discussed here when treating of simple circulation. So
much, however, is clear, that in countries producing gold and silver,
certain quantities of labor-time are directly embodied in definite
quantities of gold and silver, while in countries which do not produce
gold and silver the same result is reached in a round-about way, by
direct or indirect exchange of the commodities of those countries;
i. e. a definite portion of average national labor is given for a
definite quantity of labor-time, embodied in the gold and silver of the
mine-owning countries. In order to be able to serve as a measure of
value, gold must be as far as possible a _variable_ value, because it
can become the equivalent of other commodities only as an incarnation
of labor-time, and the same labor-time is realized in unequal volumes
of use-values with the change in the productive power of concrete
labor. In estimating all commodities in gold it is only assumed that
gold represents a given quantity of labor at a given moment, as was
done when the exchange value of any commodity was expressed in terms
of the use-value of any other commodity. As for the variations of the
value of gold, the law of exchange value formulated above holds good
in its case as well. If the exchange value of commodities remains
unchanged, then a general rise in their gold prices is possible only
in the case of a fall in the exchange value of gold. If the exchange
value of gold remains unchanged, a general rise of gold prices is
possible only when the exchange value of all commodities rises. The
reverse is true in case of a general fall in the prices of commodities.
If the value of an ounce of gold falls or rises in consequence of a
change in the labor-time required for its production, then the values
of all other commodities fall or rise to an equal extent. Thus, the
ounce of gold represents after the change, as it did before, a _given_
quantity of labor-time with regard to all commodities. The same
exchange values are now estimated in greater or smaller quantities
of gold than before, but they are estimated in proportion to the
magnitude of their values, and consequently retain the same proportion
to each other. The ratio 2 ÷ 4 ÷ 8 remains the same when expressed
as 1 ÷ 2 ÷ 4 or as 4 ÷ 8 ÷ 16. The change in the quantity of gold in
which exchange values are estimated with a variation in the value of
gold, interferes as little with the function of gold as a measure
of value, as the fifteen times smaller value of silver as compared
with that of gold interferes with the performance of that function
by the latter. Since labor-time is the common measure of gold and
commodities, and since gold figures as the measure of value only in so
far as all commodities are measured by it, the idea that money makes
commodities commensurable, is therefore a mere fiction of the process
of circulation.[39] It is rather the commensurability of commodities
as incorporated labor-time, that turns gold into money.

Commodities enter the process of exchange in the concrete form
of use-values. They are yet to be turned into the real universal
equivalent through their alienation. The determination of their prices
merely amounts to their ideal transformation into the universal
equivalent, a process of equation to gold which is yet to be realized.
But since commodities are, in their prices, transformed into gold only
in imagination, or are converted only into imaginary gold, and since
their money form is not differentiated as yet from their concrete
selves, it follows that gold has also been turned into money only
in imagination; it appears so far but as a measure of value, and in
fact definite quantities of gold serve merely as names for certain
quantities of labor-time. The form in which gold is crystallized in
money always depends upon the way in which commodities express their
own exchange value to each other.

Commodities now confront one another in a double capacity: actually as
use-values, ideally as exchange values. The twofold aspect of labor
contained in them is reflected in their mutual relations; the special
concrete labor being virtually present as their use-value, while
universal abstract labor-time is ideally represented in their price
in which commodities appear as commensurable embodiments of the same
value―substance differing merely in quantity.

The difference between exchange value and price appears to be merely
nominal or, as Adam Smith says, labor is the real price, and money
the nominal price of commodities. Instead of estimating the value of
one quarter of wheat in thirty days of labor, it is estimated in one
ounce of gold if one ounce of gold is the product of thirty days’
labor. However, far from this difference being merely nominal, all the
storms which threaten commodities in the actual process of circulation
center about it. Thirty days of labor are contained in a quarter of
wheat and it need not, therefore, be expressed in terms of labor-time.
But gold is a commodity distinct from wheat, and only in circulation
it can be ascertained, whether the quarter of wheat can be actually
turned into an ounce of gold as is anticipated in its price. That will
depend on whether or not it proves to be a use-value, whether or not
the quantity of labor-time contained in it is the quantity necessarily
required by society for the production of a quarter of wheat. The
commodity as such _is_ an exchange value, it _has_ a price. In this
difference between exchange value and price lies the demonstration of
the fact that the particular individual labor contained in a commodity
has first to be expressed through the process of alienation in terms
of its counterpart, i. e. as impersonal, abstract, universal and, only
in that form, social labor, viz. money. Whether it can be so expressed
seems to be a matter of chance. Thus, although the exchange value
of a commodity finds only ideally a distinct expression in price,
and the twofold character of labor contained in the commodity exists
as yet merely as two distinct forms of expression, and, although in
consequence thereof, the embodiment of universal labor-time, gold,
confronts actual commodities only as an imaginary measure of value, yet
the fact that exchange value exists as price, or that gold exists as a
measure of value implies the necessity of the alienation of commodities
for hard cash and the possibility of their non-alienation. In short,
here lies latent the entire contradiction which is inherent in the
fact that products are commodities or that the particular work of a
private individual can be of no account in society until it has taken
the very opposite form of abstract universal labor. For that reason,
the utopians, who want to have commodities but not money, who want a
system of production based on private exchange without the necessary
conditions underlying such a system, are consistent when they “destroy”
money not in its tangible form but in its nebulous illusory form of a
measure of value. Under the invisible measure of value there lurks the
hard cash.

The process by which gold has become the measure of value and exchange
value has been turned into price, being once assumed, all commodities
express in their prices but imagined quantities of gold of various
magnitudes. As such various quantities of the same thing, gold, they
are equated, compared and measured with each other, and thus arises the
technical necessity of referring them to a definite quantity of gold
as a unit of measure, a unit which develops into a standard measure by
virtue of its divisibility into aliquot parts, which in their turn can
be subdivided into aliquot parts.[40] But quantities of gold as such
are measured by weight.

The standard of measure is thus found ready in the general measures
of weight of metals and, therefore, where-ever metallic circulation
is in vogue, these measures serve originally as standards of price.
Since commodities no more relate to each other as exchange values to
be measured by labor-time, but as magnitudes of the same denomination
measured in gold, the latter is transformed from a _measure of value_
into a _standard of price_. The comparison of prices with each other
as different quantities of gold is thus crystallized in figures which
correspond to an assumed quantity of gold and represent it as a
standard of aliquot parts. Gold as measure of value and as standard of
price has entirely different forms of manifestation and the confusing
of the two has resulted in the wildest of theories. Gold is a measure
of value as incorporated labor-time; it is the standard of price as
certain weight of metal. Gold becomes the measure of value by virtue
of its relation as exchange value to commodities as exchange values;
as standard of price, a definite quantity of gold serves as a unit
for other quantities of gold. Gold is the measure of value, because
its value is variable; it is the standard of price, because it is
fixed as a constant unit of weight. In this case, as in all cases of
measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of a
definite and unvarying unit of measure is all-important. The necessity
of settling upon a quantity of gold as a unit of measure and upon its
aliquot parts as subdivisions of that unit, has given rise to the
notion that a certain quantity of gold which has naturally a variable
value had been assigned a fixed ratio of value to the exchange values
of all commodities; the fact is overlooked that exchange values of
commodities are transformed into prices, i. e. into quantities of gold,
before gold develops as a standard of price. No matter how the value of
gold may vary, the ratios between the values of different quantities of
gold remain constant. Let the fall in the value of gold amount to 1000
per cent., still twelve ounces of gold will have a twelve times greater
value than one ounce of gold; and in prices the only thing considered
is the ratio between different quantities of gold. Since, on the other
hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its
weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot
parts. Thus gold always renders the same service as an invariable
standard of price, no matter how much its value may vary.[41]

An historical process which, as we shall explain later, was determined
by the nature of metallic circulation, led to the result that the
same denomination of weight was retained for a constantly changing
and decreasing weight of precious metals in their function of a
standard of price. Thus the English pound sterling denotes less than
one-third of its original weight; the pound Scot, before the Union,
only 1-36; the French livre, 1-74; the Spanish Maravedi, less than
1-1000; the Portuguese Rei, a still smaller fraction. Such was the
historical origin of the discrepancy between the current money names
of various weights of metals and their weight denominations.[42]
Since the determination of the unit of measure, of its aliquot parts,
and of their names is purely conventional, and since they should
possess within the sphere of circulation the character of universality
and compulsion, they had to be settled _by law_. The purely formal
operation thus devolved upon the government.[43] The metal which
was to serve as the money material, was found already adopted in
the community. In different countries the legal standard of price
is naturally different. In England e. g. the ounce as a weight of
metal is divided into pennyweights, grains and carats Troy, but the
ounce of gold as the unit of money is divided into 3 7-8 sovereigns,
the sovereign into 20 shillings, the shilling into 12 pence, so that
100 pounds of 22 carat gold (1200 ounces) = 4672 sovereigns and 10
shillings. In the world market, however, where national boundaries
disappear, these national characteristics of the measure of money also
disappear and give place to the general measures of weight of metals.

The price of a commodity or the quantity of gold into which it is
ideally transformed, is, therefore, now expressed in the names of
coins of the gold standard. Thus, instead of saying: a quarter of
wheat is worth an ounce of gold, it is said in England to be worth 3£
17s. 10-1/2d. All prices are thus expressed in the same denominations.
The peculiar form which commodities lend to their exchange values is
transformed into a _money-denomination_ by which commodities tell each
other how much they are worth. Money in its turn becomes _money of
account_.[44]

We transform commodities into money of account, in our mind, on paper,
in conversation, whenever it is a question of expressing any kind of
wealth in terms of exchange value.[45] For that transformation we need
the gold substance, but only in imagination. In order to estimate the
value of a thousand bales of cotton in a certain number of ounces of
gold and then to express this number of ounces in the denominations of
the ounce, £. s. d., not a single atom of gold is required. Thus, not
a single ounce of gold was in circulation in Scotland before Robert
Peel’s Bank Act of 1845, although the gold ounce, expressed in its
English standard of account, 3£ 17s. 10-1/2d., served as the legal
standard of price. In a similar manner silver serves as standard of
price in the trade between Siberia and China, although that trade
virtually amounts to barter. It is, therefore, immaterial to money,
as money of account, whether or not its entire unit of measure or the
fractions thereof are really coined. In England, at the time of William
the Conqueror, 1£, then a pound of pure silver, and the shilling, 1-20
of a pound, existed only as money of account, while the penny, 1-240
of a pound of silver, was the largest silver coin in existence. On
the other hand, there are no shillings and pence in England to-day,
although they are legal denominations for certain parts of an ounce of
gold. Money as money of account may exist exclusively in idea, while
the money in actual existence may be coined according to an entirely
different standard. Thus the money in circulation in many English
colonies of North America consisted until late in the eighteenth
century of Spanish and Portuguese coins, although the money of account
was throughout the same as in England.[46]

Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard of price,
appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities,
and that, therefore, the sum of 3£ 17s. 10-1/2d. may signify, on
the one hand, an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value
of a ton of iron, this reckoning name of money has been called its
_mint-price_. Hence, there sprang up the extraordinary notion that
the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in
contradistinction to all other commodities, its price is _fixed_ by
the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning
names to definite weights of gold is the same thing as fixing the
value of those weights.[47] In so far as gold serves as one of the
elements in determining price, i. e., where it performs the function
of money of account, it not only has no _fixed_ price, but has _no_
price whatever. In order to have a price, i. e., in order to express
itself in a _specific_ commodity as a _universal_ equivalent that
other commodity would have to play the same exclusive role in the
process of circulation as gold. But two commodities excluding all other
commodities mutually exclude each other. Therefore, wherever gold and
silver have by law been made to perform side by side the function of
money or of a measure of value it has always been tried, but in vain,
to treat them as one and the same material. To assume that there is an
invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a
given quantity of labor-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact,
that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given
mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a
given mass of gold. From the reign of Edward III to the time of George
II, the history of money in England consists of one long series of
perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between
the values of gold and silver, with the fluctuations in their real
values. At one time gold was too high; at another, silver. The metal
that for the time being was estimated below its value was withdrawn
from circulation, melted and exported. The ratio between the two metals
was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ratio soon came into
conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the slight and
transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which was a
consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far
more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver,
and its expulsion from circulation by gold. During the years 1855,
1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold imports over gold exports
amounted to £41,580,000, while the excess of silver exports over silver
imports was £14,704,000. In fact, in those countries in which both
metals are legally measures of value, and therefore both legal tender,
so that every one has the option of paying in either metal, the metal
that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every other commodity,
measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone serves
in reality as the standard of value. The result of all experience
and history with regard to this question is simply that, where two
commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in
practice one alone maintains that position.[48]


B. THEORIES OF THE UNIT OF MEASURE OF MONEY.

The circumstance that commodities are converted into gold only in ideas
as prices and that gold is therefore turned into money only in idea,
gave rise to the theory of the _ideal unit of measure of money_. Since,
in the determination of prices, gold and silver serve only ideally
as money of account, it was asserted that the names pound, shilling,
pence, thaler, franc, etc., instead of denoting certain weights of
gold and silver or labor incorporated in some way, stood rather for
ideal atoms of value. Thus, if, e. g., the value of an ounce of silver
should rise it would contain more such atoms and would therefore have
to be estimated and coined in a greater number of shillings. This
doctrine, revived again during the last commercial crisis in England
and even voiced in Parliament in two separate reports attached to the
report of the select Committee on the Bank Acts sitting in July, 1858,
dates from the end of the seventeenth century.

At the time of the accession of William III., the English mint-price
of an ounce of silver was 5s. 2d., or 1-62 of an ounce of silver was
equal to a penny; 12 of these pence were called a shilling. According
to that standard, a piece of silver weighing, say, 6 ounces, would be
coined into thirty-one coins, each called a shilling. But the _market
price_ of an ounce of silver rose above its _mint price_, from 5s. 2d.
to 6s. 3d., or, in order to buy an ounce of silver bullion 6s. 3d. had
to be paid. How could the market price of an ounce of silver rise above
its mint price, when the mint price is merely a reckoning name for
aliquot parts of an ounce of silver? The riddle was easily solved. Out
of £5,600,000 of silver money which was in circulation at that time,
four millions were worn out, clipped and debased. A trial disclosed
that £57,000 of silver which were supposed to weigh 220,000 ounces,
weighed only 141,000 ounces. The mint went on coining according to
the same standard, but light-weighted shillings in actual circulation
represented smaller parts of an ounce than their name implied. Hence,
a greater quantity of these light-weighted shillings had to be paid in
the market for an ounce of silver bullion. When a general recoinage
was decided upon in consequence of the derangement that had been
produced, LOWNDES, the Secretary of the Treasury, declared that the
value of an ounce of silver had risen and therefore it must henceforth
be coined into 6s. 3d. instead of into 5s. 2d. as heretofore. His
argument practically amounted to the assertion that the rise in the
value of the ounce caused a fall in the value of its aliquot parts.
His false theory, however, served merely as an embellishment for a
just, practical purpose. The government debts were contracted in light
shillings, were they to be paid in heavy ones? Instead of saying pay
back four ounces of silver, when you had received nominally five ounces
but virtually only four, he said pay back nominally five ounces but
reduce the metallic contents to four ounces and call a shilling what
you had called four-fifths of a shilling heretofore. Thus Lowndes
practically adhered to the metallic weight while theoretically he clung
to the reckoning name. His adversaries who clung only to the name
and therefore declared the 25 to 50 per cent. lighter shilling to be
identical with the full-weight shilling maintained on the contrary that
they adhered to the metallic weight.

JOHN LOCKE, who was an advocate of the new bourgeoisie in all forms,
the manufacturers against the working classes and paupers, the
commercial class against the old fashioned usurers, the financial
aristocracy against the state debtors, and who went so far as to prove
in his own work that the bourgeois reason is the normal human reason,
also took up the challenge against Lowndes. John Locke carried the day
and money borrowed at ten or fourteen shillings to a guinea was repaid
in guineas of twenty shillings.[49] SIR JAMES STEUART sums up the
entire transaction as follows: “ ... the state gained considerably upon
the score of taxes, as well as the creditors upon their capitals and
interest; and the nation, which was the principal loser, was pleased;
because their _standard_ (The standard of their own value) was not
debased.”[50] Steuart thought that the nation would prove more alert
with the further development of commerce. He was mistaken. About 120
years later the same _quid pro quo_ was repeated.

It was just in the order of things that Bishop BERKELEY, the
representative of a mystical idealism in English philosophy, should
have given a theoretical turn to the doctrine of the ideal unit
of measure of money, something which the practical “Secretary to
the Treasury” had failed to do. He asks: “Whether the terms Crown,
Livre, Pound Sterling, etc., are not to be considered as Exponents
or Denominations of such Proportion? [namely proportions of abstract
value as such.] And whether Gold, Silver, and Paper are not Tickets
or Counters for Reckoning, Recording and Transferring thereof? (of
the proportion of value). Whether _Power_ to command the Industry of
others be not real Wealth? And whether Money be not in Truth, Tickets
or Tokens for conveying and recording such Power, and whether it be of
great consequence what Materials the Tickets are made of?”[51] Here
we find a confusion, first of the measure of value and the standard
of price, and secondly of gold and silver as measures on the one hand
and mediums of circulation on the other. Because precious metals can
be replaced by tokens in the process of circulation Berkeley comes to
the conclusion that these tokens represent nothing, i. e., only the
abstract idea of value.

SIR JAMES STEUART had so fully developed the theory of the ideal
unit of measure of money, that his successors―unconscious successors
since they do not know him―have added to it neither a new version
nor even a new example. “Money, which I call of account, is no more
than an arbitrary scale of equal parts, invented for measuring the
respective value of things vendible. Money of account, therefore, is
quite a different thing from money coin, which is price[52] and might
exist, although there was no such thing in the world as any substance
which could become an adequate and proportional equivalent, for every
commodity.... Money of account ... performs the same office with
regard to the value of things, that degrees, minutes, seconds, etc.,
do with regard to angles, or as scales do to geographical maps, or to
plans of any kind. In all these inventions, there is constantly some
denomination taken for the unit. ... The usefulness of all those
inventions being solely confined to the marking of proportion. Just so
the unit in money can have no invariable determinate proportion to any
part of value, that is to say, it cannot be fixed to any particular
quantity of gold, silver, or any other commodity whatsoever. The
unit once fixed, we can, by multiplying it, ascend to the greatest
value.... The value of commodities, therefore, depending upon a
general combination of circumstances relative to themselves and to the
fancies of men, their value ought to be considered as changing only
with respect to one another; consequently, anything which troubles or
perplexes the ascertaining those changes of proportion by the means
of a general, determinate and invariable scale, must be hurtful to
trade.... Money ... is an ideal scale of equal parts. If it be demanded
what ought to be the standard value of one part? I answer by putting
another question: What is the standard length of a degree, a minute, a
second? It has none ... but so soon as one part becomes determined by
the nature of a scale, all the rest must follow in proportion. Of this
kind of money ... we have two examples. The bank of Amsterdam presents
us with the one, the coast of Angola with the other.”[53]

Steuart speaks here simply of the part money plays in circulation
as the _standard of price_ and _money of account_. If different
commodities are marked in the price-list at 15s., 20s., 36s.,
respectively, then I care, in fact, neither for the silver substance,
nor for the name of the shilling when comparing the magnitudes of their
values. The ratios between the numbers 15, 20, 36, tell everything, and
the number 1 has become the only unit of measure. Only the abstract
proportion of numbers can at all serve as a purely abstract expression
of proportion. In order to be consistent, Steuart should have dropped
not only gold and silver, but their legal baptismal names as well.
Since he does not understand the nature of the transformation of the
measure of value into a standard of price, he naturally believes that
the definite quantity of gold which serves as a unit of measure relates
as a measure not to other quantities of gold, but to values as such.
Since commodities appear as quantities of the same denomination through
the conversion of their exchange values into prices, he denies that
property of the measure which reduces them to one denomination; and
since in this comparison of different quantities of gold the quantity
of gold which serves as a unit of measure is conventional, he does not
see the necessity of fixing it at all. Instead of calling 1-360 part
of a circle degree, he might give that name to 1-180th part; the right
angle would then be measured by 45 degrees instead of 90, and acute and
obtuse angles would be measured accordingly. Nevertheless, the measure
of the angle would remain, then, as before, first a qualitatively
definite mathematical figure, the circle, and second a quantitatively
definite part of the circle. As for Steuart’s economic illustrations,
he refutes his own argument with one and does not prove anything with
the other. The bank money of Amsterdam was, in fact, merely the
reckoning name for Spanish doubloons, which retained their full weight
by lying idly in the bank vaults, while the circulating coins became
thinner from hard rubbing against the outer world. And as for the
African idealists we have to abandon them to their fate until critical
travelers will tell us more about them.[54] The French assignat
could be called an almost ideal money in Steuart’s sense: “_National
property. Assignation of 100 francs._” To be sure, the use-value which
the assignation was supposed to represent, namely, the confiscated
land, was indicated here, but the quantitative definition of the unit
of measure was forgotten and “the franc” became a meaningless word.
How much or how little land the assignation franc represented depended
on the results of the public auctions. In practice, however, the
assignation franc circulated as a token of value of silver money and
its depreciation was, therefore, measured by this silver standard.

The period of the suspension of cash payments by the Bank of England
was hardly more fruitful of war-bulletins than of money theories. The
depreciation of bank notes and the rise of the market price of gold
above its mint price called forth again the doctrine of the ideal
unit of money on the part of some of the advocates of the Bank. Lord
Castlereagh found the classical confused expression for the confused
idea by speaking of the unit of measure of money as “a sense of value
in reference to currency as compared with commodities.” When a few
years after the peace of Paris conditions permitted the resumption of
cash payments, the same question which had been stirred up by Lowndes
under William III., came up, hardly changed in form. An enormous
government debt, as well as a mass of private debts, accumulated in
twenty years, fixed obligations, etc., had been contracted on the
basis of depreciated bank notes. Were they to be paid back in bank
notes of which £4672, 10s. nominal, actually represented 100 pounds
of 22 carat gold? THOMAS ATTWOOD, a banker of Birmingham, came forth
as _Lowndes redivivus_. The creditors were to receive nominally as
many shillings as had been nominally borrowed, but if about 1-78 of
an ounce of gold constituted a shilling according to the old standard
of coinage, then say 1-90 of an ounce should now be christened a
shilling. Attwood’s adherents are known as the Birmingham school of
“little shillingmen.” The controversy over the ideal money unit, which
had started in 1819, still went on in 1845 between Sir Robert Peel and
Attwood, whose own wisdom, as far as the function of money as a measure
is concerned, is exhaustively summed up in the following passage, in
which, referring to Sir Robert Peel’s controversy with the Birmingham
Chamber of Commerce, he says: “The substance of your queries is ...
in what sense is the word pound to be used?... To what will the sum
one pound be equivalent?... Before I venture a reply I must enquire
what constitutes a standard of value?... Is £3 17s. 10-1/2d. an _ounce_
of gold, or is it only of the _value_ of an ounce of gold? If £3 17s.
10-1/2d. be an ounce of gold, why not call things by their proper
names, and, dropping the terms pounds, shillings and pence, say ounces,
pennyweights and grains?... If we adopt the terms ounces, pennyweights
and grains of gold, as our monetary system, we should pursue a direct
system of barter.... But if gold be estimated as of the _value_ of
£3 17s. 10-1/2d. per ounce ... how is this ... that much difficulty
has been experienced at different periods to check gold from rising
to £5 4s. per ounce, and we now notice that gold is quoted at £3 17s.
9d. per ounce?... The expression _pound_ has reference to value, but
not a fixed standard value.... The term pound is the _ideal unit_....
Labour is the parent of cost and gives the relative value to gold or
iron. _Whatever denomination of words are used to express the daily or
weekly labour of a man_, such words express the cost of the commodity
produced.”[55]

In the last words the hazy conception of the ideal money measure melts
away and its real meaning breaks through. The reckoning names of gold,
pound sterling, shilling, etc., should be names for definite quantities
of labor-time. Since labor-time constitutes the substance and the
intrinsic measure of values, these names would then actually represent
definite proportions of value. In other words, labor-time is maintained
to be the true unit of measure of money. With this we leave the
Birmingham school, but should add in passing that the doctrine of the
ideal measure of money acquired new importance in the controversy over
the question of the convertibility or non-convertibility of bank notes.
If paper receives its name from gold or silver, then the convertibility
of a note or its exchangeability for gold or silver remains an economic
law, no matter what the civil law may be. Thus a Prussian paper thaler,
although legally inconvertible, would immediately depreciate if it were
worth less than a silver thaler in ordinary trade, i. e., if it were
not practically convertible. The consistent advocates of inconvertible
paper money in England, therefore, sought refuge in the ideal measure
of money. If the reckoning names of money, £, s., etc., are names of
certain quantities of atoms of value, of which a commodity absorbs or
loses now more, now less in exchange for other commodities, then an
English £5 note, e. g., is just as independent of its relation to gold
as of that to iron and cotton. Since its title would no more imply
its theoretical equality with a certain quantity of gold or any other
commodity, the demand for its convertibility, i. e., for its practical
equality with a definite quantity of a specified thing would be
excluded by the very conception of the note.

The theory of labor-time as the direct measure of money was first
systematically developed by JOHN GRAY.[56] He makes a National Central
Bank ascertain through its branches the labor-time consumed in the
production of various commodities. The producer receives an official
certificate of value in exchange for his commodity. i. e., he gets a
receipt for as much labor-time as his commodity contains,[57] and these
bank notes of one week’s labor, one day’s labor, one hour’s labor,
etc., serve at the same time as a check for an equivalent in all other
commodities stored in the bank warehouses.[58] This is the fundamental
principle carefully worked out in detail and based throughout on
existing English institutions. Under this system, says Gray, “to
sell for money may be rendered, at all times, precisely as easy as it
now is to buy with money; ... production would become the uniform and
never-failing cause of demand.”[59] The precious metals would lose
their “privilege” as against other commodities and “take their proper
place in the market beside butter and eggs, and cloth and calico, and
then the value of the precious metals will concern us just as little
... as the value of the diamond.”[60] “Shall we retain our fictitious
standard of value, gold, and thus keep the productive resources of the
country in bondage? or, shall we resort to the natural standard of
value, labour, and thereby set our productive resources free?”[61]

Labor-time being the intrinsic measure of value, why should there be
another external measure side by side with it? Why does exchange value
develop into price? Why do all commodities estimate their value in one
exclusive commodity, which is thus converted into a special embodiment
of exchange value into money? That was the problem which Gray had
to solve. Instead of solving it, he imagined that commodities could
be related directly to each other as products of social labor. But
they can relate to each other only in their capacity of commodities.
Commodities are the direct products of isolated independent private
labors, which have to be realized as universal social labor through
their alienation in the process of private exchange, that is to say,
labor based on the production of commodities becomes social labor only
through universal alienation of individual labors. But by assuming
that the labor-time contained in commodities is _directly social_
labor-time, Gray assumes it to be common labor-time or labor-time of
directly associated individuals. Under such conditions a specific
commodity like gold or silver could not confront other commodities as
the incarnation of universal labor, and exchange value would not be
turned into price; but, on the other hand, use-value would not become
exchange value, products would not become commodities and thus the
very foundation of the capitalistic system of production would be
removed. But that is not what Gray has in mind. _Products are to be
produced as commodities, but are not to be exchanged as commodities._
He entrusts a national bank with the carrying out of this pious
wish. On the one hand, society, through the bank, makes individuals
independent of the conditions of private exchange, and on the other,
it allows them to go on producing on the basis of private exchange.
The logic of things, however, compels Gray to do away with one
condition of capitalistic production after another, although he wishes
to “reform” only the money system which results from the exchange of
commodities. Thus he transforms capital into national capital,[62]
land into national property,[63] and if his bank is to be watched
closely, it will be found that it not only receives commodities with
one hand and issues certificates for work delivered with the other, but
that it regulates production as well. In his last work, “Lectures on
Money,” in which Gray is anxious to demonstrate that his labor-money
is a purely bourgeois reform, he gets tangled up in even more glaring
contradictions.

Every commodity is directly money. That was Gray’s theory deducted
from his incomplete and, therefore, false analysis of commodities.
The “organic” structure of “labor money,” the “national bank” and the
“ware-docks” are mere fantastic visions in which the dogma is made
by a legerdemain to appear to us as a universal law. The dogma that
a commodity is money or that the isolated labor of the individual
contained in it is direct social labor, will of course not become
true through the mere fact that a bank believes in it and carries on
operations accordingly. It is more likely that bankruptcy would play
in that case the part of the practical critic. What remains concealed
in Gray’s writings and hidden from himself as well, namely, that
labor-money is a well-sounding economic phrase for the pious wish to
get rid of money, and with money, of exchange value, and with exchange
value, of commodities, and with commodities, of the capitalistic mode
of production, was clearly expressed by some English socialists of whom
a few preceded and others followed Gray.[64]

But it remained for Mr. Proudhon and his school to preach in
all earnest the degradation of _money_ and the exaltation of the
_commodity_ as the gist of socialism and thus to reduce socialism to an
elementary misconception of the necessary connection between commodity
and money.[65]


2. THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION.

After the commodity has received in the process of price determination
the form in which it becomes capable of circulation, and after gold has
acquired the character of money in the same process, circulation will
both present and solve the contradictions which are inherent in the
process of exchange of commodities. The actual exchange of commodities,
i. e., the social interchange of matter consists of a change of form in
which is unfolded the double character of the commodity as use-value
and exchange value, and at the same time its own change of form is
crystallized in distinct forms of money. To describe this change of
form is to describe circulation. As we have seen, given a world of
commodities and with it a system of division of labor, commodity is but
a developed form of exchange value; in the same manner, circulation
implies a steady stream of exchange transactions which are being
continually renewed on all sides. The second assumption we make is that
commodities enter the process of exchange with a _definite price_ or
that they appear to each other in that process in a double capacity,
really as use-values, ideally―in price―as exchange values.

The liveliest streets of London are crowded with stores whose show
windows are filled with the riches of the world, Indian shawls,
American revolvers, Chinese porcelain, Parisian corsets, Russian furs
and tropical spices, but all of these things of joy bear fatal white
labels marked with Arabian figures with the laconic characters £, s.,
d. Such is the picture of the commodity appearing in circulation.


a. THE METAMORPHOSIS OF COMMODITIES.

On close examination the process of circulation is seen to consist of
two distinct cycles. If we denote commodity by the letter C and money
by the letter M we can express these two forms as follows:

  C―M―C
  M―C―M.

In this chapter we are interested exclusively in the first form, i. e.,
in the form which serves as the direct expression of the circulation of
commodities.

The process C―M―C consists of the movement C―M, the exchange of the
commodity for money, or _selling_; the opposite movement M―C, exchange
of money for a commodity, or _buying_; and of the unity of the two
movements C―M―C, exchange of the commodity for money in order to
exchange the money for a commodity, or _selling_ in order to _buy_.
But the result which marks the end of the process is C―C, exchange of
commodity for commodity, real interchange of matter.

If we look at it from the extreme end of the first commodity, C―M―C
represents its transformation into gold and its retransformation from
gold into a commodity; a movement in which the commodity exists first
as a particular use-value, then divests itself of that character,
acquires the character of exchange value or universal equivalent,
in which capacity it has nothing in common with its natural form,
then throws off the last form as well to remain finally an actual
use-value for the satisfaction of particular wants. In this last form
it falls out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption.
The entire process of circulation C―M―C thus includes the combined
series of metamorphoses, which every single commodity undergoes
in order to become a direct use-value to its possessor. The first
metamorphosis is accomplished in the first phase of the circulation
process, C―M; the second in the last phase, M―C; and the entire
process constitutes the _curriculum vitae_ of the commodity. But
the process C―M―C represents the combined metamorphosis of a single
commodity and constitutes at the same time the sum of certain one-sided
metamorphoses of other commodities, since every metamorphosis of the
first commodity constitutes its transformation into another commodity
and therefore the transformation of the other commodity into it; hence
it constitutes a twofold transformation which takes place at the same
stage of circulation. We must then consider separately each of the two
processes of exchange into which circulation C―M―C breaks up.

C―M or _sale_: commodity C enters the process of circulation not only
as a particular use-value, e. g., a ton of iron, but as a use-value
of a certain price, say, £3 17s. 10-1/2d., or an ounce of gold.
While this price is on the one hand the exponent of the quantity of
labor-time contained in a ton of iron, i. e., of the magnitude of its
value, it at the same time expresses the pious wish of the iron to
become gold, i. e., to give to the labor-time it contains the aspect
of universal social labor-time. Unless this trans-substantiation takes
place, the ton of iron not only ceases to be a commodity, but even a
product, for it is a commodity only because it is a non-use-value to
its owner; that is to say, his labor counts as actual labor only in so
far as it is labor useful to others, and the thing is useful to him
only as abstract universal labor. It is, therefore, the business of
iron, or of its owner, to find that point in the world of commodities
where iron attracts gold. But this difficulty, the _salto mortale_
of the commodity, is overcome when the sale actually takes place, as
is assumed here on the analysis of simple circulation. When the ton
of iron is realized as a use-value through its alienation, i. e., by
passing from the hands in which it is a non-use-value to hands in which
it is a use-value, it at the same time realizes its price and from mere
imaginary gold it becomes real gold. In place of the name one ounce of
gold or £3 17s. 10-1/2d., an ounce of real gold has appeared, but the
ton of iron has cleared that place. Not only does the commodity―which
in its price had been ideally converted into gold―actually turn into
gold through the sale C―M, but gold, which as a measure of value had
been only ideal money and in fact figured merely as a money name of
commodities―is now turned into actual money[66] by the same process.
Just as gold became the ideal universal equivalent, because all
commodities measured their values by it, so does it now become the
absolutely alienable commodity, real money, because it is the product
of the universal alienation of commodities for it―and the sale C―M is
the process by means of which that universal alienation takes place.
But gold becomes real money only through sale, because the exchange
values of commodities were already ideal gold in their prices.

In the sale C―M, as well as in the purchase M―C, two commodities,
entities of exchange value and use-value, confront each other, but the
exchange value of the commodity exists only ideally as price; while
as regards gold, although it is really a use-value, its use-value
is confined only to its being the bearer of exchange value and is,
therefore, merely a formal use-value, having no relation to a real
individual want. The antithesis of use-value and exchange value is thus
distributed at the two extreme poles of C―M, so that the commodity
confronts gold as a use-value which has yet to realize in gold its
exchange value or its price, while gold confronts the commodity as an
exchange value, whose formal use-value is yet to be realized in the
commodity. Only through this duplication of the commodity as commodity
and gold, and, further, through the twofold and polar relation by
virtue of which each extreme represents but ideally what its opposite
is in reality and is in reality what its opposite is only ideally―in
short, only through the appearance of commodities as two-sided polar
opposites are the contradictions solved that are inherent in the
process of exchange.

So far we have considered C―M as sale, as the conversion of commodity
into money. But if we look at it from the other end, the same process
will assume the form M―C, or purchase, i. e., the conversion of
money into commodity. Sale is necessarily its opposite at the same
time; it is the former if we look at the process from one end, and
the latter if we regard the process from the other end. In practice
this process differs only in that the initiative in C―M originates
at the commodity end or with the seller, while in M―C it comes from
the money end or the buyer. In describing the first metamorphosis
of the commodity, its conversion into money as a result of the
completion of the first phase of circulation C―M, we assume at the
same time that another commodity has been converted into money and
is now in its second phase of circulation, M―C. Thus we get into a
vicious circle of assumptions. Circulation itself constitutes such a
vicious circle. If we did not consider M in M―C as the result of a
metamorphosis of another commodity, we would thereby take exchange out
of the process of circulation. But outside of the latter the form C―M
disappears and only two different Cs confront each other, say iron
and gold, the exchange of which does not constitute a part of the
process of circulation, being direct barter. Gold, at the source of
its production, is a commodity like any other commodity. Its relative
value and that of iron or of any other commodity is expressed here in
quantities in which they are mutually exchanged. But in the process
of circulation this operation is implied, the value of gold being
already given in the prices of commodities. Nothing can, therefore,
be more erroneous than the idea that gold and commodity enter into
the relation of direct barter _within the process of circulation_ and
that their relative values are ascertained through their exchange as
simple commodities. The illusion that gold is bartered as a simple
commodity for other commodities in the process of circulation is due to
the fact that prices represent equations in which certain quantities
of commodities are made equal to certain quantities of gold, i. e.,
that the commodities are made to relate to gold in its capacity
of money, as a universal equivalent, and, therefore, appear to be
directly exchangeable for it. In so far as the price of a commodity
is _realized_ in gold, it is exchanged for gold as a commodity, as a
particular embodiment of labor-time; but in so far as it is the _price_
that is realized in gold, the commodity is exchanged for gold in its
capacity of money and not of a commodity, i. e., it is exchanged for
gold as a universal embodiment of labor-time. But in either case the
quantity of gold for which the commodity is exchanged in the process
of circulation is not determined by exchange, but the exchange is
determined by the price of the commodity, i. e., by its exchange value
estimated in gold.[67]

Within the process of circulation gold appears in everybody’s hands as
the result of sale C―M. But since C―M, sale, is at the same time M―C,
purchase, it is apparent that while C, the commodity from which the
process starts, is passing through its first metamorphosis, another
commodity, which confronts it as the opposite pole M, is completing
its second metamorphosis and is, therefore, passing through the second
phase of circulation, while the first commodity is still in the first
phase of its course.

As a result of the first phase of circulation, the sale, we get
money which is the starting point of the second phase. In place of
the commodity in its first form appears its golden equivalent. This
result may now form a resting point, since the commodity in this
second form possesses a lasting existence of its own. The commodity,
a non-use-value in the hands of its possessor, is now on hand in an
always useful, since always exchangeable, form, and it depends upon
circumstances when and at what point of the surface of the commodity
world it will again enter circulation. Its formation into a gold
chrysalis constitutes an independent period in its life which may last
a greater or less length of time. While in the case of barter the
exchange of one particular use-value is directly bound up with the
exchange of another particular use-value, the universal character of
labor which creates exchange value is manifested in the separation and
lack of coincidence of acts of purchase and sale.

_M―C, purchase_, is the inverted movement of C―M and at the same time
the second or final metamorphosis of the commodity. As gold, i. e., in
the form of the universal equivalent, the commodity can be directly
represented in the use-values of all other commodities; the latter
aspire to gold as their hereafter, but at the same time indicate in
their prices the key in which it must sound in order that their bodies,
their use-values, may take the place of money, while their souls,
their exchange-values, may enter gold. The universal product of the
alienation of commodities is the absolutely alienable commodity. There
is no qualitative and only a quantitative limit to the transformation
of gold into commodity, namely, the limit of its own quantity or
magnitude of its value. “Everything is to be had for cash.” While in
the movement C―M, the commodity, through its alienation as a use-value,
realizes its own price and the use-value of somebody else’s money; it
realizes in the movement M―C, through its alienation as an exchange
value, its own use-value and the price of the other commodity. While
through the realization of its price the commodity transforms gold
into actual money, it turns gold into its merely fleeting money-form,
through its own retransformation. Since the circulation of commodities
implies an extensive division of labor and consequently a diversity of
wants on the part of individuals, a diversity which bears an inverse
ratio to the specialization of their own products, the purchase M―C may
appear as an equation with one commodity equivalent or split up into a
series of commodity-equivalents limited by the variety of the demands
of the purchaser and by the amount of money in his possession. Just as
a sale is a purchase, so is a purchase a sale. M―C is at the same time
C―M, but the initiative belongs in this case to gold or the purchaser.

Coming back now to C―M―C, or to circulation as a whole, it is apparent
that it contains the combined series of metamorphoses through which
a commodity passes. But at the same time as one commodity enters the
first phase of its circulation and completes its first metamorphosis,
another commodity enters the second phase of circulation, completes its
second metamorphosis and falls out of circulation; the first commodity
enters at the same time the second phase of circulation completes
its second metamorphosis and falls out of circulation, while a third
commodity enters circulation, passes through the first phase of its
course completing the first metamorphosis.

Thus, the combined circulation C―M―C, as a complete metamorphosis of a
commodity always constitutes at the same time the end of the complete
metamorphosis of another commodity and the beginning of a complete
metamorphosis of a third commodity, i. e., a series without beginning
or end. To illustrate this let us call C in either extreme C’ and C”
respectively, in order to distinguish the commodities, the series
reading thus: C’―M―C”. The first member, C’―M, presupposes in fact
that M is the result of another transaction C―M, and is thus itself
merely the last member of a series C―M―C’, while the second part M―C”
is merely a result of C”―M, or appears as the first part of C”―M―C’”,
and so on. Furthermore, although M is the result of only _one_ sale,
it appears that the last part M―C, may be represented as M―C’ + M―C”
+ M―C’”, etc., i. e., it may be split up into a number of purchases,
and consequently a number of sales, or into a number of first members
of new complete metamorphoses of commodities. Since the complete
metamorphosis of a single commodity thus appears as a link not only
of one endless chain of metamorphoses, but of many such chains, the
process of circulation in the world of commodities presents a hopeless
confusion of intertwined movements constantly ending and starting anew
at a countless number of points. But every single sale or purchase
stands as an independent isolated act, whose supplemental act may be
separated from it in time and place, and therefore does not need to
follow it directly as its continuation. Every separate process of
circulation, C―M or M―C, as a transformation of one commodity into
use-value and of another into money, i. e., as the first and second
phases of circulation respectively forms an independent halting
point from either direction; but, on the other hand, all commodities
commence their second metamorphosis in the common form of the universal
equivalent, gold, and stop at the starting point of the second phase of
circulation; for that, reason any M―C dovetails in actual circulation
with any C―M; the second chapter in the life-course of one commodity
with the first chapter of that of another commodity. A, e. g., sells
£2 worth of iron. He thus completes the transaction C―M or the first
metamorphosis of commodity iron, but postpones his purchase until some
other time. At the same time B, who sold 2 quarters of wheat for £6 a
fortnight since, buys with the same £6 a coat and trousers of Moses &
Son, thus completing M―C or the second metamorphosis of the commodity,
wheat.

The two transactions M―C and C―M appear here merely as links of one
chain, because a commodity expressed in gold looks like any other
commodity, and one cannot tell by the looks of the gold whether it is
transformed iron or transformed wheat. C―M―C appears, therefore, in the
actual process of circulation as a jumble of countless accidentally
coinciding or successively following members of different complete
metamorphoses. The actual process of circulation thus appears not as
a complete metamorphosis of a commodity, not as its movement through
opposite phases, but as a mere agglomeration of many accidentally
coinciding or successive purchases and sales. The process thus loses
all clearness of outline which is so much more the case since every
single act of circulation, e. g., sale, is at the same time its
opposite, purchase, and vice versa. On the other hand, the process
of circulation is nothing but the movement of metamorphoses in the
world of commodities and, therefore, must reflect them also in its
movement as a whole. How that reflection takes place we shall consider
in the following chapter. It may be added here that in C―M―C the two
extreme Cs constitute two forms of commodities which do not bear the
same relation to M. The first C relates to money as a commodity of a
special class to a universal commodity, while money relates to the
second C as a universal commodity to an individual commodity. C―M―C
can, therefore, be reduced by abstract logic to the final form S―U―I in
which S, standing for species, forms the first extreme; U, signifying
universality, forms the connecting medium, and I, individuality,
constitutes the last extreme.

The owners of commodities entered the sphere of circulation simply
as guardians of commodities. Within that sphere they confront each
other in the opposite roles of buyer and seller, one as a personified
sugar-loaf, the other as personified gold. As soon as the sugar-loaf
is turned into gold, the seller becomes a buyer. These definite social
functions are no outgrowths of human nature, but are the products
of relations of exchange between men who produce their goods in the
form of commodities. They are so far from being purely individual
relations between buyer and seller that both enter this relation
only to the extent that their individual labor is disregarded and
is turned into money as labor of _no_ individual. Just as it is,
therefore, childish to consider these economic bourgeois roles of
buyer and seller as eternal social forms of human individuality, so it
is on the other hand, preposterous to lament in them the extinction
of individuality.[68] They are the necessary manifestations of
individuality at a certain stage of the social system of production.
Moreover, in the opposition of buyer and seller the antagonistic nature
of capitalistic production is expressed as yet so superficially
and as mere matter of form, that this opposition belongs also to
precapitalistic forms of society, since it merely requires that
the mutual relations of individuals should be those of owners of
commodities.

Now, if we consider the result of C―M―C, it comes down to mere
interchange of matter, C―C. A commodity has been exchanged for a
commodity, a use-value for a use-value, and the transformation of the
commodity into money, or the commodity in its form of money, serves
merely as a means of effecting this interchange of matter. Money thus
appears merely as a _medium of exchange_ of commodities; not as a
medium of exchange in general, but as a means of exchange in the sphere
of circulation, i. e., a _medium of circulation_.[69]

We have seen that the process of circulation of commodities comes to
a completion in C―C, appearing as mere barter carried on by means of
money; further, that C―M―C represents in general not only two isolated
processes, but their dynamic union as well; but to draw from that the
conclusion that purchase and sale form an indivisible unit, is a mode
of thinking the criticism of which belongs to the domain of logic,
and not to that of economics. The separation of purchase and sale in
the process of exchange destroys all local, primitive, patriarchal
and naively genial barriers to interchange of matter in society. It
is, moreover, the general form of the separation of the points of
coincidence and opposition in this interchange, carrying within it the
possibility of commercial crises, because the antagonism of commodity
and money is the abstract and general form of all antagonisms with
which the capitalistic system of labor is pregnant. Hence, circulation
of money is possible without crises, but crises can not occur without
money circulation. In other words, where labor based on the system of
private exchange has not reached the stage marked by the existence
of money, it is less capable of producing those phenomena which
presuppose the full development of the capitalistic mode of production.
Bearing this in mind we can appreciate the depth of the criticism
which proposes to do away with the “shortcomings” of capitalistic
production by abolishing the “privilege” enjoyed by the precious metals
and introducing a so-called “rational monetary system.” As a sample
of economic defence of an opposite character may serve the following
piece of reasoning which has been proclaimed exceedingly keen. JAMES
MILL, the father of the well-known English economist, John Stuart Mill,
says: “Whatever ... be the amount of the annual produce, it never can
exceed the amount of the annual demand.... Of two men who perform an
exchange, the one does not come with only a supply, the other with only
a demand; each of them comes with both a demand and a supply.... The
supply which he brings is the instrument of his demand; and his demand
and supply are of course exactly equal to one another. It is therefore,
impossible that there should ever be in any country a commodity or
commodities in quantity greater than the demand, without there being,
to an equal amount, some other commodity or commodities in quantity
less than the demand.”[70]

Mill restores the balance by turning the process of circulation into
direct barter and then smuggling into direct barter the character of
buyer and seller borrowed by him from the process of circulation. To
put it in his own confused language, during certain periods when all
commodities are unsaleable there are really more buyers than sellers
of one commodity, _money_, and more sellers than buyers of _all other
money_, commodities; such was, e. g., the case at certain moments
during the commercial crisis of 1857-58 in London and Hamburg. The
metaphysical balance of purchases and sales amounts to this, that
every purchase is a sale and every sale is a purchase, which is a poor
consolation to the guardian of the commodity who can not bring about
its sale and therefore can not buy.[71]

The separation of sale and purchase makes possible a large number of
fictitious transactions side by side with genuine trade before the
final exchange between the producer and the consumer of commodities
takes place. It enables a host of parasites to penetrate the process of
production and exploit the separation. But this, again, means that with
money as the universal form of labor under the capitalist system, there
is _the possibility_ of the development of its contradictions.


b. THE CIRCULATION OF MONEY.

Actual circulation appears at first sight as a mass of purchases and
sales accidentally taking place side by side. In buying as in selling,
commodities and money always stand in the same mutual relation: the
seller, on the side of the commodity; the buyer, on that of money.
Money as a medium of circulation always appears therefore as _a means
of purchase_; and in that way the difference in its destinations in
the opposite phases of the metamorphosis of the commodity becomes
indistinguishable.

Money passes into the hands of the seller in the same transaction in
which the commodity passes into the hands of the buyer. Commodities
and money thus flow in opposite directions and this change of place
in which the commodity passes over to one side and money to the other
side, occurs simultaneously at an indefinitely large number of points
on the entire surface of bourgeois society. But the first step which
the commodity makes in the sphere of circulation is also its last
step.[72] Whether it leaves its place on account of its attraction
for gold (C―M), or on account of its attraction by gold (M―C), with
one move, with one change of place it falls out of the sphere of
circulation into that of consumption. Circulation is a continuous flow
of commodities, but different commodities all the time, since each
commodity makes but one move. Every commodity enters upon the second
phase of its circulation not as the same commodity, but as another
commodity, gold. Hence the movement of a metamorphosed commodity is the
movement of gold. The same piece of gold or the identical gold coin
which changed places with one commodity in the act C―M, reappears from
the opposite end as the starting point for M―C and thus changes places
for the second time with another commodity. Just as it passed from the
hands of buyer B into those of seller A, it now leaves A’s hands who
has become a buyer and passes into C’s hands. The path described by a
commodity in its transformation into money and its retransformation
from money, i. e., the movement of a complete metamorphosis of a
commodity assumes the aspect of an apparent movement of the same coin
that changes places twice with two different commodities. No matter in
how scattered and haphazard fashion purchases and sales may take place
near each other, there is always in actual circulation a seller for
each buyer and the money which moves into the place of the commodity
sold, before it came into the hands of the buyer, must have already
changed places with another commodity. Sooner or later it again leaves
the hands of the seller, who turns buyer, to pass into the hands of
a new seller and this frequently repeated change of place forms the
interlacing of the metamorphoses of commodities. The same coins are
moving, some more, others less frequently, from one place in the
sphere of circulation to another, always in the direction opposite to
that of the commodities moved, thus describing a longer or shorter
circulation-curve. The different movements of the same coin can follow
each other in point of time only, and on the contrary, the many
scattered purchases and sales which appear as so many separate changes
of place between commodities and money, occur simultaneously separated
only in point of space.

The circulation of commodities C―M―C in its elementary form is
completely described in the transition of money from the hands of the
buyer into those of the seller and from the hands of the latter, as
soon as he has turned buyer, into those of a new seller. This completes
the metamorphosis of the commodity and with it the movement of money
in so far as that movement is the expression of the metamorphosis.
But since new use-values are continually produced in the shape of new
commodities and must thus be constantly thrown anew into circulation,
the process C―M―C is repeatedly renewed by the same commodity owners.
The money which they have spent as buyers gets back into their hands
as soon as they appear again as vendors of commodities. The constant
renewal of the circulation of commodities finds its reflection in the
continual circulation over the entire surface of bourgeois society of
a quantity of money which, passing from hand to hand, describes at the
same time a number of different small cycles starting from numberless
points and returning each to its own starting point, to repeat the same
movement over again.

The change of form on the part of commodities appears as a mere change
of place on the part of money and the continuity of the circulation
movement is all on the side of money, since the commodity always makes
but one step in the direction opposite to money, while the latter makes
in each case the second step for the commodity; the entire movement
seems, therefore, to proceed from money, although in the case of a sale
the commodity draws money out of its place, i. e., it circulates money
as much as it is circulated by the latter in the case of a purchase.
Furthermore, owing to the fact that money always confronts commodities
in its capacity of a means of purchase, and in that capacity moves
commodities only by realizing their price, the entire movement of
circulation appears as a change of place between money and commodities,
the former realizing the prices of the latter either by separate acts
of circulation taking place simultaneously and side by side, or by
successive transactions when the same coin realizes the prices of
different commodities one after another. If we consider, e. g., the
series C―M―C’―M―C”―M―C’”, etc., without regard to the qualitative
aspects which become indistinguishable in the process of circulation,
we witness the same monotonous operation. After realizing the price
of C, M successively realizes those of C’, C”, etc., and commodities
C’, C”, C’”, etc., constantly take the place which money has left.
Money thus appears to keep commodities in circulation by realizing
their prices. In discharging this function of realization of prices,
money is itself constantly circulating, now changing its place, now
describing a curve of circulation, now completing a small circuit where
the starting and returning points coincide. As a medium of circulation,
money is subject to a circulation of its own. The change of form of
the circulating commodities appears, therefore, as a movement of money
which furthers the exchange of commodities, motionless in themselves.
The movement of the circulation process of commodities thus takes on
the form of the movement of gold as a medium of circulation, i. e. of
the _circulation of money_.

Since owners of commodities give the products of their individual labor
the appearance of products of social labor by turning one object,
viz. gold, into the direct expression of universal labor-time and
therefore into money, their own movement by which all of them effect
the interchange of the material products of their labor now appears to
them as the direct movement of that one object, as the circulation of
gold. The social movement itself appears to the owners of commodities
partly as an outward necessity and partly as a mere formal intermediary
process which enables every individual who puts any use-value into
circulation to get other use-values out of it of an equal value. The
use-value of commodities comes into play with their disappearance from
the sphere or circulation, while the use-value of money as a medium of
circulation is in its very circulation. The movement of a commodity
in the sphere of circulation is of a transitory kind, while ceaseless
motion in that sphere constitutes the function of money. Through this
special function which it performs within the sphere of circulation
money acquires a new capacity, which we have to consider now more
closely.

In the first place, we see that the circulation of money forms an
endlessly split up movement, since it reflects the splitting up of the
process of circulation into an infinitely large number of purchases
and sales and the independent separation of the mutually supplementary
phases of metamorphoses of commodities. In the small cycles described
by money, where the starting and returning points coincide, we do find
a return movement, i. e., an actual circular movement, but the fact
that there are as many starting points as there are commodities and
that the number of these cycles is infinitely large puts them beyond
all control, measurement, or computation. The time between the start
and the return of a commodity is just as indefinite. Moreover, it is
immaterial whether or not such a circuit has been actually described in
a given case. No economic fact is more generally known than that one
can spend money with one hand without getting it back with the other.
Money proceeds from an endless number of points and returns to as many
different points, but the coincidence of the starting and returning
points is a matter of chance, because in the movement C―M―C the turning
of the buyer again into a seller is not a necessary condition. Still
less does the circulation of money resemble a movement radiating
from a common centre to all points of the periphery and back from
the peripheral points to the centre. The so-called cycle described
by money, as it is pictured, amounts simply to this, that at all
points we observe its appearance and disappearance, its never ceasing
transition from place to place. In a higher, more involved form of
money circulation, e. g. bank-note circulation, we shall find that
the conditions of emission of money include those for its return. But
in the simple money circulation it is a matter of chance for the same
buyer to become again a seller. Where we really see constant cycle
motions taking place, they are only reflections of deeper forces in
the sphere of production, e. g., the manufacturer draws money from his
banker on Friday, pays it out to his working-men on Saturday, the men
immediately pay out the greater part of it to the storekeepers, etc.,
and the latter turn it in on Monday back to the banker.

We have seen that money realizes simultaneously a certain number of
prices in the variegated purchases and sales which take place side by
side at the same time. On the other hand, in so far as its movement
represents the movement of the combined metamorphoses of commodities
and the interlacing of these metamorphoses, the same coin realizes
the prices of different commodities and thus makes a larger or
smaller number of moves. If we take the circulation of a country for
a given length of time, say a day, the quantity of gold required for
the realization of prices and, consequently, for the circulation of
commodities, will be determined by two conditions: first, the sum
total of the prices; second, the average number of moves made by one
coin. This number of moves or the rapidity of circulation of money is
in its turn determined by or expresses the average rapidity with which
commodities go through the different phases of their metamorphoses, the
rapidity with which these metamorphoses succeed one another, and with
which those commodities that have gone through their metamorphoses are
replaced by new commodities in the process of circulation. We have seen
that in the process of the determination of prices the exchange value
of all commodities is ideally converted into a certain quantity of gold
of the same value and that the same amount of value is present in a
double form in either of the isolated acts of circulation M―C and C―M,
first embodied in the commodity, and second, in gold; yet gold enjoys
the capacity of a medium of circulation not by virtue of its isolated
relation to separate commodities in a state of rest, but owing to its
active presence in the dynamic world of commodities, viz., its function
of expressing the change of form of commodities by its change of place
and expressing the rapidity of their change of form by the rapidity of
its change of place. The extent to which it is present in the sphere
of circulation, i. e., the actual quantity of gold in circulation, is
thus determined by the extent to which it is discharging its function
throughout the entire process.

The circulation of money implies the circulation of commodities; money
circulates commodities which have prices, i. e., which are beforehand
ideally equated to certain quantities of gold. In the determination
of the prices of commodities, the value of the quantity of gold
which serves as a unit of measure, or the value of gold, is assumed
to be given. Under that assumption the quantity of gold necessary
for circulation is determined first of all by the sum total of the
prices of commodities that are to be realized. But this sum is itself
determined: 1. By the level of prices, the relatively high or low
exchange value of commodities estimated in gold; and 2. By the mass
of commodities circulating at fixed prices, i. e. by the number of
purchases and sales at given prices.[73] If one quarter of wheat is
worth 60 shillings, then twice as much gold is required to circulate it
or to realize its price as would be the case if it were worth only 30
shillings. To circulate 500 quarters of wheat at 60 shillings, twice
as much gold is necessary as for the circulation of 250 quarters at
the same price. Finally, to circulate 10 quarters at 100 shillings
only half as much money is necessary as when circulating 40 quarters
at 50 shillings. It follows that the quantity of gold required for
circulation may fall in spite of a rise in price, if the mass of
commodities in circulation declines in a greater ratio than the
rise of the combined sum of prices; and, inversely, the quantity of
the circulating medium may rise in spite of a decline of the mass
of commodities in circulation, if the sum total of prices rises in
a greater ratio. Thorough and minute English investigations have
demonstrated e. g. that in the early stages of a dearth of grain in
England the quantity of money in circulation increases, because the
total price of the diminished supply of grain is greater than the
former total price of a larger supply of grain, while the circulation
of the other commodities continues undisturbed for some time at their
old prices. At a later stage of the dearth of grain, there is a decline
in the quantity of circulating money, either because less goods are
sold at old prices besides grain, or the same quantity of those goods
is sold at lower prices.

But, as we have seen, the quantity of money in circulation is
determined not only by the sum total of prices of commodities that are
to be realized, but also by the rapidity with which money circulates
or with which it completes this work of realization. If the same
sovereign makes ten purchases a day, each of a commodity having a
price of one sovereign, and thus changes hands ten times, it does as
much work as would be accomplished by ten sovereigns each performing
but a single act of circulation a day.[74] Consequently, rapidity of
gold circulation can make up for its quantity, or the presence of gold
in the sphere of circulation is determined not only by its presence
as an equivalent of a commodity side by side with it, but also by
its participation in the movement of metamorphoses of commodities.
The rapidity of the circulation of money, however, can serve as a
substitute for its quantity only to a limited extent, since at any
given moment an endless number of isolated purchases and sales takes
places in different localities.

If the total price of the commodities in circulation rises, but in
a smaller ratio than the increase in the rapidity of circulation of
money, the volume of the circulating medium will diminish. If on the
contrary the rapidity of circulation decreases in a greater ratio
than the total price of the commodities in circulation, the volume
of currency will increase. An increasing volume of currency combined
with a general fall of prices or a diminishing volume of currency in
connection with a general rise of prices is one of the best known
phenomena in the history of prices. But the consideration of the
causes which bring about a simultaneous rise in the level of prices
and a still greater rise in the rate of velocity of circulation of
money, or the opposite phenomenon, falls outside of the sphere of
simple circulation. By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that
in periods of prevailing credit, the rapidity of circulation of
money grows faster than the prices of commodities, while in times
of declining credit the prices of commodities fall slower than the
rapidity of circulation. The shallow and artificial character of the
simple circulation of money is manifested in the fact that all the
elements which have a determining influence on the volume of currency,
such as the volume of commodities in circulation, prices, the rise or
fall of prices, the number of simultaneous purchases and sales, the
rapidity of the circulation of money,―depend on the metamorphic process
which takes place in the world of commodities, and that again depends
on the general character of the methods of production, the size of
population, the relation between city and country, the development of
the means of transportation, the greater or less division of labor,
credit, etc.; in short, on circumstances all of which lie _outside_ of
the sphere of simple circulation of money and are only reflected in it.

The rapidity of circulation being given, the volume of currency is
simply determined by the prices of commodities. Hence, prices are not
high or low, because there is more or less money in circulation, but
on the contrary, there is more or less money in circulation, because
prices are high or low. This is one of the most important laws, whose
demonstration in detail by means of the history of prices constitutes
perhaps the only merit of the post-Ricardian English Political Economy.
If experience shows, that the level of metallic circulation or the mass
of gold and silver in circulation in a given country is subject to
temporary ebbs and tides and very violent ones at times,[75] but on
the whole remains stationary for long periods, the deviations forming
but small oscillations about the average level, this is explained
by the antagonistic nature of the circumstances which determine the
quantity of money in circulation. Their simultaneous modifications
neutralize their effects and leave everything where it was before.

The law, that with a given rapidity of circulation of money and a given
total sum of prices of commodities the quantity of the circulating
medium is determined, may also be expressed as follows. If the exchange
values of commodities and the average rapidity of their metamorphoses
are given, the quantity of gold in circulation depends on its own
value. If, therefore, the value of gold, i. e. the labor-time necessary
for its production, should rise or fall, the prices of commodities will
rise or fall in inverse ratio, and corresponding to that rise or fall
of prices, the rapidity of circulation remaining the same, a larger or
smaller quantity of gold would be required to keep the same volume of
commodities in circulation. The same change would occur, if the old
standard of value were superseded by a more or less valuable metal.
Thus, Holland required from fourteen to fifteen times as much silver as
it had previously required gold, in order to circulate the same volume
of commodities, when out of tender regard for the government creditors
and out of fear of the effects of the discoveries in California and
Australia it substituted silver for gold money.

From the fact that the quantity of gold in circulation depends on the
variable sum total of prices of commodities and the varying rapidity
of circulation, it follows that the volume of the circulating medium
must be capable of contraction and expansion; in short, that according
to the requirements of circulation, gold must now enter, now leave the
sphere of circulation in its capacity of a medium of circulation. How
the circulation process itself realizes these conditions, we shall see
later on.


C. COIN AND SYMBOLS OF VALUE.

In its capacity of a medium of circulation, gold acquires a shape
of its own, it becomes _coin_. In order to prevent any technical
difficulties in the way of its circulation, it is coined according to
the standard of the money of account. Gold pieces whose imprints and
legends show that they contain certain weights of gold corresponding
to the reckoning names of money, £, s., etc., are coins. The
establishment of a mint-price, as well as the technical work of
coining, are the business of the state. Both as money of account and
as coin, money acquires a _local and political character_; it speaks
different languages and wears different national uniforms. The sphere
in which money circulates as coin, is distinguished as an _internal_
sphere of circulation which is separated from the _universal_ sphere of
circulation in the commodity world by national boundaries.

Yet, the only difference between gold bullion and gold coin is that
between coin denomination and weight denomination. What seems to be a
difference in name in the latter case appears as a difference in shape
in the former. Gold coin can be thrown into the melting-pot and thus be
converted again into gold _sans phrase_, just as, on the contrary, gold
bars only have to be sent to the mint to receive the shape of coins.
The conversion and reconversion from one form into another appears to
be a purely technical matter.

For 100 pounds or 1200 ounces troy of 22 carat gold one can get
£4,672-1/2 or gold sovereigns at the English mint; if these sovereigns
be put on one side of the weighing scale and one hundred pounds of
gold bullion on the other, the two will balance each other, which
proves that the sovereign is nothing but a piece of gold of certain
weight bearing this name in English coinage and having a shape and
stamp of its own. The 4,672-1/2 sovereigns are put into circulation
at different points, and once in its grasp they make a certain number
of moves per day, some sovereigns more, others less. If the average
number of moves per day of each ounce be ten, the 1200 ounces of gold
would realize 12,000 ounces or 46,725 sovereigns as the total price
of commodities. You may turn and toss an ounce of gold in any way you
like, and it will never weigh ten ounces. But here in the process of
circulation one ounce practically does weigh ten ounces. The work
performed by a coin in the sphere of circulation is equivalent to the
quantity of gold it contains multiplied by the number of its moves.
Besides the actual importance which a coin possesses by virtue of its
being an individual piece of gold of a definite weight, it acquires
an ideal significance due to its function. But whether the sovereign
circulates once or ten times, in each particular purchase or sale
it acts only as one sovereign. It is like a general who by timely
appearance at ten different points on the battle field does the work
of ten generals, but still remains the same identical general at each
point. The idealization of the means of circulation which is due to the
supplanting of quantity by rapidity in money circulation, affects only
the function of the coin within the sphere of circulation, but not the
nature of the individual coin.

The circulation of money is a movement through the outside world, and
the sovereign, though it _non olet_, keeps rather mixed company. In the
course of its friction against all kinds of hands, pouches, pockets,
purses, money-belts, bags, chests and strong-boxes, the coin rubs off,
loses one gold atom here and another one there and thus, as it wears
off in its wanderings over the world, it loses more and more of its
intrinsic substance. By being used it gets used up. Let us take up a
sovereign at the moment when its natural, inborn character has been
slightly affected. A baker, says Dodd,[76] who receives from the bank
to-day a brand new sovereign and pays it tomorrow to the miller,
does not pay the same veritable sovereign; the latter has become
lighter than it was at the time he received it. It is clear, says an
anonymous writer,[77] that in the very nature of things, coins must
depreciate one by one as a result of ordinary and unavoidable friction.
It is a physical impossibility to entirely exclude light coins from
circulation at any time, even for one day. Jacob estimates that of
the 380 million pounds sterling which were in existence in Europe in
1809, nineteen million pounds sterling entirely disappeared by 1829,
i. e., within a period of twenty years.[78] Thus, while a commodity
at its first step into the sphere of circulation, falls out of it, a
coin, after a couple of steps within that sphere represents more metal
than it actually contains. The longer a coin remains in circulation,
the rapidity of circulation remaining the same, or the greater its
rapidity of circulation within the same period of time, the greater
the discrepancy between its form as coin and its actual gold or silver
substance. What remains is _magni nominis umbra_. The body of the coin
becomes but a shadow. If at first it became heavier through the process
of circulation, it now becomes lighter on account of it, but continues
to represent the original quantity of gold in each single purchase or
sale. The sovereign, as a fictitious sovereign, as fictitious gold,
continues to perform the function of a legitimate coin. While other
beings lose their idealism in contact with the outer world, the coin is
idealized by practice, being gradually transformed into a mere phantom
of its golden or silver body. This second idealization of metal money
springing from the very process of circulation, or from the discrepancy
between its nominal weight and its real weight is exploited in all
kinds of coin counterfeiting practiced partly by governments, partly by
private adventurers. The entire history of coinage from the beginning
of the middle ages until late in the eighteenth century is nothing
but a history of these twofold and antagonistic adulterations, and
Custodi’s voluminous collection of writings of Italian economists turns
mostly about this point.

But the fictitious importance of gold due to its function, comes
in conflict with its real substance. One gold coin has lost more,
another, less of its metal substance in the course of circulation,
and one of them is, as a matter of fact, worth more now than the
other. But since in the discharge of their function of coins they
are taken at the same value, the sovereign weighing a quarter of an
ounce passing for no more than the sovereign which only stands for a
quarter of an ounce, the full-weight sovereigns are subjected in the
hands of unscrupulous owners to surgical operations which produce
artificially what the circulation process has caused in a natural way
to their more light-weighted brothers. They are clipped and reduced
and the superfluous gold fat lands in the melting pot. If 4,672-1/2
gold sovereigns when put on one side of the weighing scale weigh on an
average only 800 ounces instead of 1200, they will buy when brought
to the gold market only 800 ounces of gold; that is, the market price
of gold would rise above its mint price. Every coin, even if of full
weight would pass in its mint form for less than in bullion form. The
full weight sovereigns would be reconverted into bullion, a form in
which a greater quantity of gold is always worth more than a smaller
quantity. As soon as this decline of metallic weight would affect a
sufficiently large number of sovereigns to bring about a permanent
rise of the market price of gold above its mint price, the reckoning
names of the coins, though remaining the same, would begin to denote a
smaller quantity of gold. That is to say, the standard of money would
change and gold would be coined in the future according to this new
standard. By virtue of its idealization as a medium of circulation,
gold would react upon and change the legally determined ratios under
which it acted as the standard of price. The same revolution would
be repeated after a certain length of time and thus gold would be
subject to constant change both as a standard of price and as a
medium of circulation, a change under one of these forms leading to a
change under the other and vice versa. This explains the phenomenon
mentioned above, namely that in the history of all modern nations
the same money-name stands for a constantly diminishing quantity of
metal. The contradiction between gold as coin and gold as standard of
price becomes also one between gold as coin and gold as the universal
equivalent; in the latter capacity it circulates not only within the
limits of national boundaries, but in the world market. As a measure of
value gold was always of full weight, because it served only as ideal
gold. In its capacity of equivalent in the isolated transaction C―M it
passes at once from a state of motion to a state of rest; but in its
capacity of coin its natural substance comes in constant conflict with
its function. The transformation of the gold sovereign into fictitious
gold can not be wholly avoided, but legislation seeks to prevent its
unlimited circulation as coin by prescribing its withdrawal from
circulation as soon as its shortage of metallic substance reaches a
certain degree. According to the English law, e. g., a sovereign which
lacks more than 0.747 grains of its weight ceases to be legal tender.
The Bank of England which weighed forty-eight million gold sovereigns
in the short period between 1844 and 1848, possesses in Mr. Cotton’s
gold weighing scale a machine which not only detects a difference of
1-100 part of a grain between two sovereigns, but like a sensible
being, immediately throws out the light-weight coin on a board where
it lands under another machine which cuts it up with oriental cruelty.

That being the case, gold coins could not circulate at all were not
their circulation confined to definite spheres in which they do not
wear off so rapidly. In so far as a gold coin weighing only one-fifth
of an ounce passes in circulation for a quarter of an ounce of gold,
it is practically merely a sign or a symbol for one-twentieth of an
ounce of gold, and in that way all gold coins are transformed by the
very process of circulation into more or less of a mere sign or symbol
of their substance. But no thing can be its own symbol. Painted grapes
are no symbol of real grapes, they are imaginary grapes. Still less can
a light-weight sovereign be a symbol of a full-weighted one, just as
a lean horse can not serve as a symbol of a fat one. Since gold thus
becomes a symbol of its own self, but at the same time can not serve in
that capacity, it receives a symbolical, silver or copper substitute in
those spheres of circulation in which it is most subject to wear and
tear, namely where purchases and sales are constantly taking place on
the smallest scale. In these spheres, even if not the same identical
coins, still a certain part of the entire supply of gold money would
constantly circulate as coin. To that extent gold is substituted by
silver or copper tokens. Thus, while only a specific commodity can
perform in a given country the function of a measure of value and
therefore of money, different commodities can serve as coin side by
side with gold. These subsidiary mediums of circulation, such as silver
or copper coins, represent definite fractions of a gold coin within
the sphere of circulation. Their own silver or copper weight is,
therefore, not determined by the proportions of the respective values
of silver and copper to that of gold, but is arbitrarily fixed by law.
They may be issued only in such quantities in which the diminutive
fractions of gold coin which they represent would constantly circulate
either for purposes of change for gold coins of higher denominations,
or for realizing equally small prices of commodities. In retail trade
silver and copper tokens belong to distinct spheres of circulation. In
the nature of things, the rapidity of their circulation is in inverse
ratio to the price which they realize in each separate purchase or
sale, or to the size of the fraction of gold coin which they represent.
If we consider how immense the volume of the daily retail trade in a
country like England is, we will understand from the comparatively
insignificant proportions of its combined volume how rapid and steady
the circulation of the subsidiary coin must be. From a parliamentary
report of recent date we see, e. g., that in 1857 the English mint
coined £4,859,000 worth of gold, £733,000 of silver nominal value which
contained metal actually worth £363,000. The total amount of gold
coined in the ten years ending December 31, 1857, was £55,239,000, and
of silver only £2,434,000. The supply of copper coin in 1857 amounted
only to £6,720 nominal value containing £3,492 worth of copper; of this
£3,136 was in pennies, £2,464 in half-pennies, and £1,120 in farthings.
The total value of copper coined in the ten years was £141,477 nominal,
the metallic value being £73,503. Just as gold coin is prevented from
permanently retaining its function of coin by the legal provision of
the loss of weight which demonetizes it, so are the silver and copper
tokens prevented from passing from their spheres of circulation into
that of gold coin and acquiring the character of money by the provision
of the maximum amount for which they are legal tender. In England e.
g. copper is legal tender only to the amount of six pence and silver
up to forty shillings. If silver and copper tokens were to be issued
in greater quantities than the requirements of their spheres of
circulation call for, prices of commodities would not rise as a result,
but the accumulation of these tokens in the hands of retail dealers
would reach such an extent that they would be finally compelled to sell
them as metal. Thus in 1798 English copper coins, issued by private
individuals, accumulated in the hands of small traders to the amount
of £20,350 which they tried in vain to put again in circulation, being
finally compelled to throw them as metal on the copper market.[79]

The silver and copper tokens which represent gold coin in certain
spheres of circulation in the interior of the country, contain a
definite quantity of silver and copper prescribed by law, but after
they get into circulation, they wear off like gold coins and become
even more rapidly mere phantoms, according to the rapidity and
steadiness of their circulation. To draw again a line of demonetization
beyond which silver and copper tokens would lose their character of
coins, they would have to be replaced in turn within certain spheres
of their own circulation by some other symbolic money, say iron and
lead, and such representation of one kind of symbolic money by another
kind would form an endless process. In all countries with a well
developed circulation the very requirements of money circulation make
it necessary that the character of silver and copper tokens as money be
made independent of any loss of weight in those coins. Thus, as it was
in the nature of things, it appears that they serve as symbols of gold
coin not because they are symbols made of silver or copper, not because
they have certain value, but only in so far as they have no value.

Relatively worthless things, such as _paper_, can consequently perform
the function of symbols of gold money. That subsidiary currency
consists of metal tokens, such as silver, copper, etc., is mainly due
to the fact that in most countries the less valuable metals such as
silver in England, copper in ancient Rome, Sweden, Scotland, etc.,
had circulated as money before they were degraded by the process of
circulation to the rank of small change and replaced by a more precious
metal. Besides, it is natural that the money symbol which grows
directly out of metallic circulation, should itself be a metal. Just
as that portion of gold which would always have to circulate as small
change, is replaced by metal tokens; so can the other portion of gold
which is constantly absorbed as coin by circulation in the interior of
the country and, therefore, must continually circulate, be replaced
with worthless tokens. The level below which the mass of circulating
coin never sinks is determined in each country by experience. Thus,
the originally imperceptible difference between the nominal weight and
the metallic weight of a metal coin can grow apace until it reaches the
point of absolute separation. The mint name of money parts company with
its substance and exists outside of it in worthless slips of paper.
Just as the exchange value of commodities is crystallized by their
process of exchange into gold money, so is gold money sublimated in
its currency into its own symbol first in the form of worn coin, then
in the form of subsidiary metal currency, and finally in the form of a
worthless token, paper, mere _sign of value_.

Gold coin has produced its substitutes, first metallic and then paper,
only because in spite of its loss of metallic weight it continued to
perform the function of coin. It did not circulate because of its wear
and tear; on the contrary, it wore out to a symbol because it continued
to circulate. Only in so far as gold money becomes simply a token of
its own value in the process of circulation, can mere tokens of value
take its place.

In so far as the movement C―M―C represents a dynamic unity of two
processes C―M and M―C which pass directly one into the other, or in
so far as a commodity passes through the complete process of its
metamorphosis, it express its exchange value in price and in money
only to discard that form at once and to become again a commodity or,
rather, a use-value. That is to say, it develops _only an apparent
assertion of the independence_ of its exchange value. On the other
hand, we have seen that gold, in so far as it performs the function
of coin or in so far as it continually circulates, actually forms
only a connecting link between the metamorphoses of commodities and
constitutes _but their transitory money form_; furthermore, that it
realizes the price of one set of commodities only in order to realize
that of another, but in no case does it constitute a stable form of
exchange value or appear itself as a commodity in a state of rest. The
reality which the exchange value of commodities acquires in the process
and which is represented by gold in its circulation, is the reality of
an electric spark. Although real gold, it plays the part of fictitious
gold, and can, therefore, be replaced in this function by a token of
itself.

The token of value, say paper, which plays the part of coin, is the
token of a quantity of gold expressed in its currency name, i. e., it
is a gold token. Just as a certain quantity of gold does not in itself
express a value ratio, so is that true of the token which takes its
place. In so far as a certain quantity of gold, as embodied labor-time,
has a value of a certain magnitude, the gold token represents value.
But the magnitude of the value which it represents depends all the
time on the value of the quantity of gold for which it stands. As
regards commodities the token of value expresses _the reality of their
price_, it is _signum pretii_ and sign of their value only because
their value is expressed in their price. In the process C―M―C, in so
far as it represents the dynamic unity or direct alternation of the
two metamorphoses―and that is the aspect it assumes in the sphere of
circulation in which the token of value discharges its function―the
exchange value of commodities acquires in price only an ideal
expression and in money only an imaginary symbolic existence. Exchange
value thus acquires _only_ an imaginary though material expression,
but it has no real existence except in the commodities themselves, in
so far as a certain quantity of labor-time is embodied in them. It
_appears_, therefore, that the token of value represents _directly_
the value of commodities, by figuring not as a token of gold but as
a token of the value which exists in the commodity alone and is only
expressed in price. But it is a false appearance. The token of value is
directly only _a token of price_, i. e., a _token of gold_, and only
indirectly a token of value of a commodity. Unlike Peter Shlemihl, gold
has not sold its shadow, but buys with its shadow. The token of value
operates only in so far as it represents the price of one commodity
as against that of another within the sphere of circulation, or in so
far as it _represents gold_ to every owner of commodities. A certain
comparatively worthless object such as a piece of leather, a slip of
paper, etc., becomes by force of custom a token of money material, but
maintains its existence in that capacity only so long as its character
as a symbol of money is guaranteed by the general acquiescence of
the owners of commodities, i. e., so long as it enjoys a legally
established conventional existence and compulsory circulation. Paper
money issued by the state and circulating as legal tender is the
perfected form of the token of value, and the only form of paper money,
which has its immediate origin in metallic circulation or even in the
simple circulation of commodities. _Credit money_ belongs to a higher
sphere of the social process of production and is governed by entirely
different laws. Symbolic paper money does not in fact, differ in the
least from subsidiary metal coin, except that it reaches wider spheres
of circulation. We have seen that the mere technical development of the
standard of price or of the mint price and later the shaping of gold
bullion into coin have called forth the interference of the state; this
circumstance brought about a visible separation of national circulation
from the world circulation of commodities: this separation is completed
by the evolution of coin into a token of value. As a mere medium of
circulation money can assume an independent existence only within the
sphere of national circulation.[80]

Our presentation has shown that the coin form of gold as a token of
value differentiated from the gold substance itself, has its direct
origin in the process of circulation and not in any agreement or state
interference. Russia offers a striking example of the natural origin of
the token of value. At the time when hides and furs played there the
part of money, the conflict between the perishable and bulky nature of
the material and its function as a medium of circulation resulted in
the custom of replacing it by small pieces of stamped leather which
thus became a kind of draft payable in hides and furs. Later on they
became under the name of copecs mere tokens for fractions of the silver
rouble and remained in use in some parts until 1700, when Peter the
Great ordered their withdrawal in exchange for small copper coins
issued by the state. Ancient writers who could observe the phenomena
of exclusively metallic circulation, already took the view of coin
as a symbol or token of value. That is true both of _Plato_[81] and
_Aristotle_.[82] In countries where credit is not developed, as e. g.
in China, legal tender paper money is found at an early date[83]. Early
advocates of paper money expressly point out the fact that metallic
coin is transformed into a token of value in the very process of
circulation. So Benjamin Franklin[84] and Bishop Berkeley.[85]

How many reams of paper cut up into bills can circulate as money? Put
in that way, the question would be absurd. The worthless tokens are
signs of value only in so far as they represent gold within the sphere
of circulation and they represent it only to the extent to which it
would itself be absorbed as coin by the process of circulation; this
quantity is determined by its own value, the exchange values of the
commodities and the rapidity of their metamorphoses being given. Bills
of a denomination of £5 could circulate in a quantity five times
less than those of £1 denomination, and if all payments were made in
shilling bills, then twenty times as many shilling bills would have to
be in circulation as are one pound bills. If the gold currency were
represented by bills of different denominations, e. g. five pound,
one pound and ten shilling bills, then the quantity of these different
tokens of value would be determined not only by the quantity of gold
necessary for circulation as a whole, but also by that required in the
sphere of circulation of each kind of bills. If fourteen million pounds
sterling (this is the provision of the English Bank Law, not for the
entire currency but only for credit money) were the level below which
the circulation of a country never sank, then fourteen million paper
bills, each a token of value of one pound, could circulate. If the
value of gold fell or rose because the labor-time necessary for its
production had fallen or risen, then, the exchange value of the same
volume of commodities remaining the same, the number of one pound bills
in circulation would rise or fall in inverse ratio to the change in the
value of gold. If gold were replaced by silver as a measure of value,
the ratio of the respective values of silver and gold being 1:15, and
if each bill were to represent now the same quantity of silver as it
represented gold before, then there would be 210 million one pound
bills in circulation instead of the previous fourteen million. The
number of paper bills is thus determined by the quantity of gold money
which they represent in circulation, and since they are tokens of value
only in so far as they represent it, their value is simply determined
by their _quantity_. Thus, while the quantity of gold in circulation
is determined by the prices of commodities, the value of the paper
bills in circulation, on the contrary, depends exclusively on their own
quantity.

The interference of the state which issues paper money as legal
tender―and we are treating of paper money of that kind only―seems to
do away with the economic law. The state which in its mint price gave
a certain name to a piece of gold of certain weight, and in the act of
coinage only impressed its stamp on gold, seems now to turn paper into
gold by the magic of its stamp. Since paper bills are legal tender,
no one can prevent the state from forcing as large a quantity of them
as it desires into circulation and from impressing upon it any coin
denomination, such as £1, £5, £20. The bills which have once gotten
into circulation can not be removed, since on the one hand their course
is hemmed in by the frontier posts of the country and on the other
they lose all value, use-value, as well as exchange-value, outside
of circulation. Take away from them their function and they become
worthless rags of paper. Yet this power of the state is a mere fiction.
It may throw into circulation any desired quantity of paper bills of
whatever denomination, but with this mechanical act its control ceases.
Once in the grip of circulation and the token of value or paper money
becomes subject to its intrinsic laws.

If fourteen million pounds sterling were the quantity of gold
required for the circulation of commodities and if the state were to
put into circulation two hundred and ten million bills each of the
denomination of £1, then these two hundred and ten millions would
become the representatives of gold to the amount of fourteen million
pounds sterling. It would be the same as if the state were to make
the one pound bills represent a fifteen times less valuable metal or
a fifteen times smaller weight of gold. Nothing would be changed but
the nomenclature of the standard of price, which by its very nature is
conventional, no matter whether such change takes place as a direct
result of a change of the mint standard or indirectly owing to an
increase of paper bills to an extent required by a new lower standard.
Since the name £ would stand now for a fifteen times smaller quantity
of gold, the prices of all commodities would increase fifteen times and
two hundred and ten million one pound bills would now be actually as
necessary as fourteen million had been before. To the same extent to
which the combined quantity of tokens of value would increase now, the
quantity of gold which each of them represents would decrease. The rise
of prices would constitute but a reaction on the part of the process of
circulation which forcibly equates the tokens of value to the quantity
of gold which they are supposed to replace.

In the history of the debasement of money in England and France by
their governments, we find repeatedly that prices had not risen in the
same proportion in which the silver coinage had been debased. That was
simply due to the fact that the proportion in which the currency was
increased did not correspond to the proportion in which it had been
debased; that is to say, because an inadequate quantity of coins of
the poorer metallic composition was issued, if the exchange values
of commodities were to be estimated in the future in the new coin as
a measure of value and be realized in coins corresponding to this
smaller unit of measure. This solves the difficulty left unsettled in
the controversy between Locke and Lowndes. The ratio which a token
of value, whether made of paper or of debased gold or silver, bears
to certain weights of gold or silver estimated according to the mint
price, depends not on its own composition but on the quantity in which
it is found in circulation. The difficulty in understanding this is
due to the fact that money in its two functions of a measure of value
and a medium of circulation is subject to two not only opposite but
apparently contradictory laws corresponding to the difference in the
two functions. In the discharge of its function of a measure of value
where money serves merely as money of account and gold only as ideal
gold, everything depends on the natural substance of money. Estimated
in silver or expressed in silver prices exchange values are naturally
estimated quite differently than when measured in gold or as gold
prices. On the contrary, in its function of a medium of circulation,
where gold is not only imagined but is actually present side by side
with other commodities, its substance is immaterial and everything
depends on its quantity. For the unit of measure the determining factor
is whether it consists of a pound of gold, silver or copper; while in
the case of coin, no matter what its own composition is, it will become
the embodiment of each of these units of measure in accordance with its
quantity. But it goes against common sense that in the case of mere
imaginary money everything should depend on its material substance,
while in that of the palpably present coin all should be determined by
an ideal ratio of numbers.

The rise or fall of prices of commodities following a rise or fall
of the quantity of paper notes―the latter only where paper currency
constitutes the exclusive medium of circulation―is thus nothing but
an assertion through the process of circulation of a law mechanically
violated from without; namely, that the quantity of gold in circulation
is determined by the prices of commodities, and the quantity of tokens
of value in circulation is determined by the quantity of gold coin
which it represents. For that reason any desired number of paper notes
will be absorbed and equally digested by the process of circulation,
because the token of value, no matter with what gold title it may enter
circulation, will be compressed within the latter to a token of that
quantity of gold which could actually circulate in its place.

In the case of the circulation of tokens of value all laws pertaining
to the circulation of real money appear to be reversed and standing
on their heads. While gold circulates because it has value, paper has
value because it circulates. While with a given exchange value of
commodities, the quantity of gold in circulation depends on its own
value, the value of paper depends on its own quantity in circulation.
While the quantity of gold in circulation rises or falls with the
rise or fall of prices of commodities, the prices of commodities
seem to rise or fall with the change in the quantity of paper in
circulation. While the circulation of commodities can absorb only a
definite quantity of gold coin and as a result of that the alternating
contraction and expansion of the currency appears as a necessary law,
paper money seems to enter circulation in any desired amount. While
the state is guilty of debasing gold and silver coin and of disturbing
their function of a medium of circulation, if it turns out a coin,
only 1-100 of a grain below its nominal weight; it performs a perfectly
proper operation by issuing absolutely worthless paper notes which
contain nothing of the metal except its mint denomination. While gold
coin apparently represents the value of commodities only in so far as
that value is itself estimated in gold or is expressed in price, the
token of value seems to represent directly the value of commodities.
It is, therefore, clear why students who examined one-sidedly the
phenomena of circulation of money by confining their observations to
the circulation of legal tender paper money, should have failed to
grasp the intrinsic laws governing the circulation of money. As a
matter of fact, these laws appear not only reversed but extinct in the
circulation of tokens of value, since paper currency, if issued in
the right quantity, goes through certain movements which are not in
its nature as a token of value, while its proper movement instead of
growing directly out of the metamorphosis of commodities, springs from
the violation of its proper proportion to gold.


3. MONEY.

Money as distinguished from coin, the result of the circulation process
C―M―C, forms the starting point of the circulation process M―C―M, i.
e. the exchange of money for commodity in order to exchange commodity
for money. In the form C―M―C, commodity forms the starting and final
points of the movement; in the form M―C―M, money plays that part. In
the former case money is the medium of exchange of commodities, in
the latter the commodity helps money to become money. Money which
appears merely as a means of circulation in the first form becomes
an end in the second form; while commodity which appeared first as
the end, now becomes but a means. Since money is itself the result of
circulation C―M―C, the result of circulation appears at the same time
as its starting point in the form M―C―M. While in the case of C―M―C the
interchange of matter constituted the real import of the process, the
form of the commodity resulting from this first process constitutes the
import of the second process M―C―M.

In the form C―M―C the two extreme members are commodities of the same
value, but qualitatively different use-values. Their mutual exchange
C―C constitutes actual interchange of matter. In the form M―C―M the
two extremes are gold and at the same time gold of equal value. To
exchange gold for a commodity in order to exchange the commodity for
gold, or if we consider the final result M―M, to exchange gold for
gold, seems absurd. But if we translate the formula M―C―M into the
expression: _to buy_ in order _to sell_, which means nothing but to
exchange gold for gold through an intervening movement, we recognize
at once the prevailing form of capitalist production. In actual
practice, however, people do not buy in order to sell, but they buy
cheap in order to sell dear. Money is exchanged for a commodity in
order to exchange the same commodity for a larger amount of money, so
that the extremes M, M are, if not qualitatively, then quantitatively
different. Such a quantitative difference presupposes the _exchange of
non-equivalents_, yet commodity and money as such are only opposite
forms of the same commodity, i. e. they are different forms of the same
magnitude of value. The circuit M―C―M thus conceals under the forms
of money and commodity more highly developed relations of production,
and is but a reflection within the sphere of simple circulation of a
movement of a more advanced character. Money, as distinguished from the
medium of circulation, must therefore be developed from the direct form
of circulation of commodities, C―M―C.

Gold, i. e., the specific commodity which serves as a measure of
value and a medium of circulation, becomes money without any further
assistance on the part of society. In England, where silver is neither
the measure of value nor the prevailing medium of circulation, it
does not become money, just as gold in Holland, as soon as it had been
dethroned as a measure of value, ceased to be money. A commodity thus
becomes money only in its combined capacity of a measure of value
and medium of circulation; or, the unity of the measure of value and
medium of circulation is money. As such a unity, however, gold has a
separate existence independent of its existence in the two functions.
As a measure of value it is only ideal money and ideal gold; as a mere
medium of circulation it is symbolic money and symbolic gold; but in
its plain metallic bodily form gold is money or money is real gold.

Let us now consider for a moment the commodity gold when it is in a
state of rest, and plays the part of money in its relation to other
commodities. All commodities represent in their prices a certain
quantity of gold, that is to say, they are merely imaginary gold or
imaginary money, representatives of gold, just as, on the other hand,
money in the form of a token of value appeared as a mere representative
of prices of commodities.[86] Since all commodities are thus but
imaginary money, money is the only real commodity. Contrary to
commodities, which only represent the independently existing exchange
value, i. e., universal social labor, or abstract wealth, gold is the
_material form of abstract wealth_. Through its use-value, every
commodity, by its relation to some particular want, expresses only one
aspect of material wealth, but one side of wealth. Money, however,
satisfies every want since it can be directly converted into the object
of any want. Its own use-value is realized in the endless series of
use-values which form its equivalents. In its virgin metallic state
it holds locked up all the material wealth which lies unfolded in the
world of commodities. Thus, while commodities represent in their prices
the universal equivalent or abstract wealth, viz., gold, the latter
represents in its use-value the use-values of all commodities. Gold
is, therefore, _the bodily representative of material wealth_. It is
the “precis de toutes les choses” (Boisguillebert), the compendium
of the wealth of society. At one and the same time, it is the direct
incarnation of universal labor in its form, and the aggregate
of all concrete labor in its substance. It is universal wealth
individualized.[87] As a medium of circulation it underwent all kinds
of injury, was clipped, and even reduced to the condition of a mere
symbolic paper rag. As money it is restored to its golden glory.[88]
From a serve it becomes a lord. From a mere understrapper it rises to
the position of Lord of commodities.[89]


a. HOARDING.

Gold separates itself as money from the process of circulation whenever
a commodity interrupts the process of its metamorphosis and remains
in its form of a gold chrysalis. This occurs every time a sale is not
immediately followed by purchase. The independent isolation of gold
as money is, thus, a material expression of the disintegration of the
process of circulation, or of the metamorphosis of commodities, into
two separate acts independent of each other. The coin itself becomes
money as soon as its course is interrupted. In the hands of the seller
who takes it in exchange for his commodity, it is money and not coin;
as soon as it passes out of his hands it is again coin. Everybody is
a seller of the one commodity which he produces, but a buyer of all
other commodities which he needs for his existence in society. While
his selling is determined by the labor-time required for the production
of his commodity, his buying is determined by the continual renewal
of the wants of life. In order to be able to buy without having sold
anything, he must sell without buying. In fact, the circulation process
C―M―C is a dynamic unity of sale and purchase only in so far as it
constitutes at the same time the constant process of its separation.
In order that money should flow continuously as coin, coin must
constantly coagulate as money. The continuous flow of coin depends on
its constant accumulations in the form of reserve-funds of coin which
spring up throughout the sphere of circulation and form sources of
supply; the formation, distribution, disappearance, and reformation of
these reserve funds is constantly changing, their existence constantly
disappears, their disappearance constantly exists. Adam Smith expressed
this never-ceasing transformation of coin into money and of money
into coin by saying that every owner of commodities must always keep
in supply besides the particular commodity which he sells, a certain
quantity of the universal commodity with which he buys. We saw, that
in the process C―M―C the second member M―C splits up into a series of
purchases which do not take place at once, but at intervals of time,
so that one part of M circulates as money while the other rests as
money. Money is in that case only _suspended coin_ and the separate
parts of the circulating mass of coins appear now in one form, now in
another, constantly changing. This first transformation of the medium
of circulation into money represents, therefore, but a technical aspect
of money circulation.[90]

The primitive form of wealth is that of a surplus or superabundance,
i. e., that part of the products which are not immediately required as
use-values, or the possession of such products whose use-value falls
outside the sphere of mere necessaries. When considering the transition
of commodity into money we saw that this surplus or superabundance of
products constitutes the proper sphere of exchange at a low stage of
development of production. Superfluous products become exchangeable
products or commodities. The adequate form of this surplus is gold and
silver, the first form in which wealth as abstract social wealth is
preserved. Commodities can not only be stored up in the form of gold
and silver, i. e., in the substance of money, but gold and silver are
wealth in preserved form. While every use-value performs its service
as such by being consumed, i. e., destroyed, the use-value of gold as
money consists in its being the bearer of exchange value, in embodying
universal labor-time as a shapeless raw material. As shapeless metal,
exchange value possesses an indestructible form. Gold or silver thus
brought to rest as money, forms a _hoard_. Among nations with an
exclusively metallic circulation, such as the ancients were, hoarding
is practiced universally from the individual to the state which guards
its state hoard. In more ancient times, in Asia and Egypt, these
hoards under the protection of kings and priests appear rather as a
mark of their power. In Greece and Rome it was part of public policy
to accumulate state hoards as the safest and most available form of
surplus. The quick transfer of such hoards by conquerors from one
country to another and the sudden outpour of a part of these hoards
into the general circulation constitute a peculiar feature of ancient
economy.

As the incarnation of labor-time gold is a pledge for its own value,
and since it is the embodiment of _universal_ labor-time, the process
of circulation pledges gold its constant rôle of exchange value.
Owing to the mere fact that the owner of commodities can retain his
commodity in the form of exchange value or retain the exchange-value as
a commodity, the exchange of commodities for the purpose of retaining
them in the transformed shape of gold becomes circulation’s own motive.
The metamorphosis C―M takes place for the sake of the metamorphosis,
i. e., in order to transform it from particular natural wealth into
universal social wealth. Instead of change of matter, change of form
becomes its own purpose. From a mere form of the movement exchange
value becomes its substance. Commodity is preserved as wealth, as
commodity, only in so far as it keeps within the sphere of circulation,
and it keeps in that fluent state only in so far as it solidifies in
the form of silver and gold. It remains in the stream of circulation as
its crystal. At the same time gold and silver themselves become money
only in so far as they do not play the part of mediums of circulation.
_As non-mediums of circulation they become money._ The withdrawal of a
commodity from circulation in the form of gold is therefore the only
means of keeping it constantly within the sphere of circulation.

The owner of commodities can receive money from circulation only
in return for a commodity which he gives to it. Constant selling,
continual throwing of commodities into circulation is, therefore, the
first condition of hoarding from the standpoint of the circulation
of commodities. On the other hand, money as a medium of circulation
constantly disappears in the very process of circulation by being
realized all the time in use-values and becoming dissolved in fleeting
pleasures. It must, therefore, be taken out of the all-consuming
stream of circulation or the commodity must be kept up in its first
metamorphosis, so that money is prevented from performing its function
of a means of purchase. The commodity owner who has now become a
hoarder, must sell as much as possible and buy as little as possible,
as old Cato had taught: “patrem familias vendacem, non emacem esse.”
While industry constitutes the positive condition of hoarding, saving
forms the negative one. The less the equivalent of a commodity is
withdrawn from circulation in the form of particular commodities
or use-values, the more it is withdrawn in the shape of money or
exchange value.[91] The acquisition of wealth in its universal form
thus requires abstinence from wealth in its material reality. Thus
the stimulating impulse for hoarding is _greed_, the objects of which
are not commodities as use-values, but exchange value as commodity.
In order to get possession of the surplus in its universal form, the
particular wants must be treated as so much luxury and excess. Thus
the Cortes presented a report to Philipp II., in 1593, in which, among
other things, was said: “The Cortes of Valladolid in the year 1586
petitioned Your Majesty not to allow the further importation into the
Kingdom of candles, glassware, jewelry, knives and similar articles;
these things useless to human life come from abroad to be exchanged
for gold, as though the Spaniards were Indians.” The hoarder despises
the worldly, temporary and transitory enjoyments in his hunt after
the eternal treasure, which neither moth nor rust can eat, which is
perfectly celestial and earthly at the same time. “The general remote
cause of our want of money is the great excess of this Kingdom in
consuming the Commodities of Forreine Countries, which prove to us
discommodities, in hindering us of so much treasure, which otherwise
would bee brought in, in lieu of those toyes.... Wee ... consume
amongst us, that great abundance of the Wines of Spaine, of France, of
the Rhene, of the Levant ... the Raisins of Spaine, the Corints of the
Levant, the Lawnes and Cambricks of Hannaults ... the Silkes of Italie,
the Sugers and Tobaco of the West Indies, the Spices of the East
Indies: All which are of no necessetie unto us and yet are bought with
ready mony.”[92]

In the form of gold and silver, wealth is indestructible, both
because exchange value is preserved in the shape of indestructible
metal, and, especially, because gold and silver are prevented from
becoming, as mediums of circulation, mere vanishing money forms of
the commodity. The destructible substance is thus sacrificed for the
indestructible form. “If money be taken (by means of taxation) from
him, who spendeth the same ... upon eating and drinking, or any other
perishing Commodity; and the same transferred to one that bestoweth it
on Cloaths; I say that even in this case the Commonwealth hath some
little advantage; because Cloaths do not altogether perish so soon as
Meats and Drinks. But if the same be spent in Furniture of Houses,
the advantage is yet a little more; if in Building of Houses, yet
more; if in improving of Lands, working of Mines, Fishing, etc., yet
more; but most of all, in bringing Gold and Silver into the Country;
because those things are not only not perishable, but are esteemed
for Wealth at all times and everywhere; whereas other Commodities
which are perishable, or whose value depends upon the Fashion; or
which are contingently scarce and plentiful, are Wealth, but pro hic
et nunc.”[93] The withdrawal of money from the stream of circulation
and the saving of it from the social interchange of matter reaches
its extreme form in the _burying_ of money, so that social wealth is
brought as an underground indestructible treasure into a perfectly
secret private relation with the owner of commodities. Dr. Bernier, who
stayed for some time at the court of Aurenzeb at Delhi, tells us how
the merchants, especially the Mohammedan heathens, who control nearly
all the trade and all money, secretly bury their money deep in the
ground, “being imbued with the faith that the gold and silver which
they put away during their lives will serve them after death in the
next world.”[94] However, in so far as the asceticism of the hoarder is
combined with active industry, he is rather a Protestant by religion
and still more a Puritan. “It can not be denied that buying and selling
are necessary, that one can not get along without them, and that one
can buy like a Christian especially things that serve in need and in
honor; for the patriarchs had also bought and sold cattle, wool, grain,
butter, milk and other goods. They are gifts of God which He gives out
of the earth and divides among men. But foreign trade which brings
over from Calcutta, India and other such places commodities consisting
of costly silks, and gold ware, and spices which only serve for luxury
and are of no use, draining the land and the people of their money,
should not be tolerated if we but had a government of princes. Yet I
do not wish to write of that now, for I believe it will have to stop
of itself, when we have no money any longer; and so will luxury and
gluttony; for no writing or teaching will help until want and poverty
will force us.”[95]

In times of disturbance in the process of the social interchange of
matter, the burying of money takes place even in bourgeois societies
which are at a high stage of development. The social bond in its
compact form is being saved from the social movement (with the owner
of commodities this bond is the commodity and the adequate form of the
commodity is money). The social _nervus rerum_ is buried next to the
body whose nerve it is.

The hoard would now become mere useless metal, its money soul would
depart from it and it would remain as the burnt ashes of circulation,
as its caput mortuum, if it did not constantly tend to get back into
circulation. Money, or crystallized exchange value, is, according to
its nature, the form of abstract wealth; but, on the other hand, any
given sum of money is a quantitatively limited magnitude of value.
The quantitative limitation of exchange value is in contradiction
with its qualitative universality and the hoarder conceives in it a
barrier which turns, in fact, into a qualitative barrier as well and
makes of the hoard merely a limited representative of material wealth.
Money, in its capacity of a universal equivalent, appears, as we have
seen, as a member of an equation, the other member of which consists
of an endless series of commodities. It depends on the magnitude of
the exchange value to what extent money will be realized in such an
endless series, i. e., to what degree it corresponds to the conception
of it as an exchange value. The automatic movement of exchange value
as exchange value can only tend to its passing beyond its quantitative
limits. But by exceeding the quantitative limits of the hoard a new
limit is created which must be removed in its turn. There is no
definite limit which appears as a barrier to further hoarding, every
limit plays that part. Hoard accumulation has, therefore, no inherent
limits, no inherent measure; it is an endless process which finds in
each successive result an impulse for a new beginning. While the hoard
is increased only by being preserved, it is preserved only by being
increased.

Money is not only _an_ object of the passion for riches; it is _the_
object of that passion. The latter is essentially _auri sacra fames_.
The passion for riches, contrary to that for special kinds of natural
wealth or use-values, such as clothing, ornaments, herds, etc., is
possible only when universal wealth has been individualized as such
in a particular object and can, therefore, be retained in the form of
a single commodity. Money appears then no less as an object than as
a source of the passion for riches.[96] The underlying fact of the
matter is that exchange value as such and with it its increase become
the final aim. Greed holds the hoard fast by not allowing the money
to become a medium of circulation, but the thirst for gold saves the
money soul of the hoard by keeping up the lasting affinity of gold for
circulation.

To sum up, the activity by which hoards are built up resolves itself
into withdrawal of money from circulation by continually repeated
sales, and simple hoarding or _accumulation_. In fact, it is only
in the sphere of simple circulation and, especially, in the form of
hoarding, that accumulation of wealth as such takes place, while, as we
shall see later, in the case of other so-called forms of accumulation
it is only a misnomer to call them by that name in mere recollection
of the simple accumulation of money. All other commodities are hoarded
either as use-values, in which case the manner of storing them up is
determined by the peculiarities of their use-value: the storing of
grain, e. g., requires special equipment; the accumulation of sheep
makes one a shepherd; the accumulation of slaves and land creates
relations of master and servant, etc.; the accumulation of particular
kinds of wealth requires special processes different from the simple
act of hoarding, and develops special individual traits. Or, wealth
in the form of commodities is hoarded as exchange-value and in that
case hoarding appears as a commercial or a specific economic operation.
The one who carries on such operations becomes a dealer in corn, in
cattle, etc. Gold and silver are money not through some activity of
the individual who accumulates it, but as crystals of the process of
circulation which goes on without any aid on his part. He has nothing
to do but to put them aside, adding new weights of metal to his
hoard, a perfectly senseless operation which, if applied to all other
commodities, would deprive them of all value.[97]

Our hoarder appears as a martyr of exchange value, a holy ascetic
crowning the metal pillar. He cares for wealth only in its social
form and therefore he buries it away from society. He wants to have
the commodity in the form in which it is always capable of entering
circulation and therefore he withdraws it from circulation. He dreams
of exchange value and therefore does not exchange. The fluid form of
wealth and its petrification, the elixir of life and the stone of
wisdom madly haunt each other in alchemic fashion. In his imaginary
unlimited passion for enjoyment he denies himself all enjoyment.
Because he wishes to satisfy all social wants, he barely satisfies
his elementary natural wants. While holding fast to his wealth in
its metallic bodily form, the latter escapes him as a phantom. As a
matter of fact, however, the hoarding of money for the sake of money
is the barbaric form of production for production’s sake, i. e., the
development of the productive forces of social labor beyond the limits
of ordinary wants. The less the production of commodities is developed,
the more important is the first crystallization of exchange value into
money, or hoarding, which plays, therefore, an important part among
the ancient nations, in Asia until the present day, and among modern
agricultural nations where exchange value has not as yet taken hold of
all the relations of production. Before taking up the consideration
of the specific economic function of hoarding within the sphere of
metallic circulation, let us mention another form of hoarding.

Quite apart from their aesthetic properties, silver and gold
commodities are convertible into money, since the material of which
they are made is a money material; and, inversely, gold money and gold
bullion can be converted into commodities. Because gold and silver
constitute the material of abstract wealth, the greatest display
of wealth consists of the utilization of these metals as concrete
use-values, and if the owner of commodities hides his treasure at
certain stages of production, he is very anxious to appear before
other owners of commodities as _rico hombre_ whenever he can do so
with safety. He gilds himself and his house.[98] In Asia, especially
in India, where, unlike under the capitalist system, the hoarding
of wealth appears not as a subordinate function of the system of
production, but as an end in itself, gold and silver commodities are
practically but aesthetic forms of hoards. In mediaeval England gold
and silver commodities were considered before the law as mere forms of
treasure, since their value was but slightly increased by the crude
labor spent upon them. They were destined to re-enter circulation
and their fineness was therefore prescribed in the same manner as
that of coin. The increasing use of gold and silver as objects of
luxury with the growth of wealth is such a simple matter that it was
perfectly clear to the ancients,[99] while modern economists have
advanced the erroneous proposition that the use of silver and gold
articles increases not in proportion to the growth of wealth, but
in proportion to the fall in value of the precious metals. Their
otherwise accurate references to the use of Californian and Australian
gold are inconclusive, since the increased consumption of gold as a
raw material does not find justification, according to their theory,
in any corresponding decline in its value. From 1810 to 1830, in
consequence of the struggle of the American colonies against Spain and
the interruption of mining caused by revolutions, the annual average
production of precious metals declined by more than one-half. The
decline of coin in circulation in Europe amounted to nearly one-sixth,
comparing the years 1829 and 1809. Although the quantity produced had
thus declined and the cost of production, if it had changed at all,
had increased, yet the consumption of precious metals as objects of
luxury increased to an extraordinary extent in England during the very
war and on the continent after the Peace of Paris. The consumption
increased with the general growth of wealth.[100] It may be stated
as a general law that the conversion of gold and silver money into
articles of luxury prevails in times of peace, while their reconversion
into bullion or even coin takes place in stormy periods.[101] How
considerable the proportion is of the gold and silver treasure in the
form of articles of luxury to the quantity of precious metals serving
as money may be seen from the fact that in 1829 the proportion in
England, according to Jacob, was two to one, and in entire Europe and
America the precious metals in the form of articles of luxury exceeded
those in the form of money by one-fourth.

We have seen that the circulation of money is but the manifestation of
the metamorphoses of commodities, or of the form under which the social
interchange of matter takes place. With the change in the total price
of commodities in circulation or in the volume of their simultaneous
metamorphoses, the rapidity of their change of form in each case being
given, the total quantity of gold in circulation must always expand
or contract. That is possible only under the condition that the total
quantity of money in the country continually bear a varying ratio to
the quantity of money in circulation. This condition is met by the
process of hoarding. With a fall in prices or rise in the rapidity
of circulation, the hoard-reservoirs absorb that part of money which
is thrown out of circulation; with a rise in price or a decline in
the rapidity of circulation, the hoards open up and return a part
of their contents to the stream of circulation. The solidification
of circulating money into hoards and the outpouring of hoards into
circulation is a constantly oscillating movement in which the
prevalence of the one or the other tendency is determined exclusively
by fluctuations in the circulation of commodities. Hoards thus serve as
conduits for the supply and withdrawal of money to or from circulation,
so that every time only that quantity of money circulates as coin which
is required by the immediate needs of circulation. If the volume of the
entire circulation suddenly expands and the fluent unity of sale and
purchase assumes such dimensions that the total sum of prices to be
realized increases more rapidly than the rapidity of the circulation of
money, the hoards decrease perceptibly; but when the combined movement
slackens to an unusual extent, or the movement of buying and selling
steadies itself, the medium of circulation solidifies into money in
large measure, and the treasure reservoirs fill up far above their
average level. In countries with an exclusively metallic circulation
or where production is at a low stage of development, the hoards are
endlessly split up and scattered all over the land, while in countries
where the capitalist system is developed they are concentrated in bank
reservoirs. Hoards are not to be confounded with coin reservoirs, which
form a constituent part of the total supply of money in circulation,
while the interaction between hoards and currency implies the decline
or rise of its total supply. Gold and silver commodities form, as we
have seen, both conduits for the withdrawal of precious metals, as
well as sources of their supply. In ordinary times only their former
function is of importance to the economy of metallic circulation.[102]


b. MEANS OF PAYMENT.

The two forms which have so far distinguished money from the
circulating medium are those of _suspended coin_ and of the _hoard_.
The temporary transformation of coin into money in the case of the
former means that the second phase of C―M―C, namely purchase M―C,
must break up within a certain sphere of circulation into a series
of successive purchases. As to hoarding, it is simply based on the
isolation of the act C―M when it does not immediately pass into M―C,
or is but an independent development of the first metamorphosis of
a commodity; it represents money as the result of the alienation of
all commodities in contradistinction to the medium of circulation as
the embodiment of commodities in their always alienable form. Coin
reserves and hoards are money only as non-circulating mediums and
are non-circulating mediums only because they do not circulate. In
the capacity in which we consider money now, it circulates or enters
circulation, but does not perform the function of a circulating medium.
As a medium of circulation money is always a means of purchase, now it
does not act in that capacity.

As soon as money develops through the process of hoarding into the
embodiment of abstract social wealth and the tangible representative
of material wealth, it assumes in that capacity special functions
within the process of circulation. If money circulates merely as a
medium of circulation and therefore as a means of purchase, it is
understood that commodity and money confront each other at the same
time, i. e., that the same value is present in a double form: at one
pole, as a commodity in the hands of the seller; at the other pole as
money in the hands of the buyer. This simultaneous existence of the two
equivalents at opposite poles and their simultaneous change of places
or mutual alienation presupposes in its turn that seller and buyer
enter into relations as owners of equivalents that are on hand. But in
the course of time, the process of the metamorphosis of commodities
which produces the different forms of money, transforms also the owners
of commodities or changes the character in which they appear before
each other in the community. In the process of metamorphosis of the
commodity the guardian of the latter changes his skin as often as
the commodity changes place or as the money assumes new forms. Thus,
the owners of commodities originally confronted each other only as
commodity owners, but later on they became one a buyer, the other a
seller; then each became alternately buyer and seller, then hoarders,
and finally rich men. In that manner, the owners of commodities do not
come out of the process of circulation the same men that they entered.
In fact the different forms which money assumes in the process of
circulation are but crystallized changes of form of the commodities
themselves, which in their turn are but concrete expressions of the
changing social relations in which commodity owners carry on the
interchange of matter with one another. New trade relations spring up
in the process of circulation, and, as representatives of these changed
relations, commodity owners assume new economic roles. Just as gold
becomes idealized within the process of circulation and plain paper,
in its capacity of a representative of gold, performs the function
of money, so does the same process of circulation lend the weight of
actual seller and buyer to the buyer and seller who enter it merely as
representatives of future money and future commodities.

All the forms in which gold develops into money, are but the unfolding
of potentialities which the metamorphosis of commodities bears within
itself. These forms did not become distinctly differentiated in the
process of simple money circulation where money appears as coin and
the movement C―M―C forms a dynamic unity; at most, they appeared
as mere potentialities as, e. g., in the case of the break in the
metamorphosis of a commodity. We have seen that in the process C―M
the relations between the commodity and money were those of an actual
use-value and ideal exchange-value to an actual exchange value and
only ideal use-value. By alienating his commodity as a use-value the
seller realized its own exchange value and the use-value of money. On
the contrary, the buyer, by alienating his money as exchange value,
realized its own use-value and the price of the commodity. Commodity
and money changed places accordingly. When it comes to a realization
in actual life of this bi-polar contrast, a new break occurs. The
seller actually alienates his commodity, but realizes its price only in
idea: he has sold his commodity at its price, which is to be realized,
however, only subsequently, at a time agreed upon. The purchaser buys
as the representative of future money, while the vender sells as the
owner of present goods. On the part of the vender, the commodity as
use-value is actually alienated, without the price being actually
realized; on the part of the purchaser, money is actually realized
in the use-value of the commodity, without being actually alienated
as exchange value. Instead of a token of value representing money
symbolically as was the case before, the purchaser himself performs
that part now. And just as in the former case the symbolic nature of
the token of value called forth the guarantee of the state which has
made it legal tender, so does the personal symbolism of the buyer bring
about legally enforcible private contracts among commodity owners.

The contrary may happen in the process M―C, where the money can be
alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way the price of the
commodity can be realized before the use-value of the money is realized
and the commodity actually delivered. This occurs constantly under
the everyday form of pre-payments. And it is under this form that the
English government purchases opium from the ryots of India, or, foreign
merchants residing in Russia mostly buy agricultural products. In these
cases, however, the money always acts in its well known role of a means
of purchase and therefore, does not assume any new forms.[103] We need
not dwell, therefore, on this case any longer; but with reference to
the changed form which the two processes M―C and C―M assume now, we
may note that the difference between purchase and sale which appeared
but imaginary in the direct process of circulation, now becomes a real
difference, since in the former case only the money is present and in
the latter only the commodity, and in either case only that extreme is
present from which the initiative comes. Besides, the two forms have
this in common: that in either, one of the equivalents is present only
in the common will of the buyer and seller,―a will that is binding on
both and assumes definite legal forms.

Seller and buyer become creditor and debtor. While the commodity
owner looked comical as the guardian of a treasure, he now becomes
awe-inspiring, since he no longer identifies himself but his neighbor
with a certain sum of money and makes him and not himself a martyr of
exchange value. From a believer he becomes a creditor, for religion he
substitutes law.

  “I stay here on my bond!”

Thus, in the modified form C―M in which the commodity is present and
money is only represented, money plays first of all the part of a
measure of value. The exchange value of the commodity is estimated in
money as its measure; but as exchange value, established by contract,
price exists not only in the mind of the seller, but also as a measure
of obligation on the part of the buyer. Besides serving as a measure of
value, money plays here the part of a means of purchase, although in
that capacity it only casts ahead the shadow of its future existence.
It attracts the commodity from its position in the hand of the seller
into that of the buyer. As soon as the term of the contract expires,
money enters circulation, since it changes its position by passing
from the hands of the former buyer into those of the former seller.
But it does not enter circulation as a circulating medium or as a
means of purchase. It performed those functions before it was present
and it appears after it has ceased to perform them. It now enters
circulation as the only adequate equivalent of the commodity, as the
absolute form of existence of exchange value, as the last word of the
process of exchange, in short as money, and money in its distinct role
of a _universal means of payment_. In this capacity of a means of
payment money appears as the absolute commodity, but within the sphere
of circulation and not without it as was the case with hoards. The
difference between the means of purchase and the means of payment makes
itself unpleasantly felt in periods of commercial crises.[104]

Originally, the conversion of the product into money in the sphere of
circulation appears only as an individual necessity for the commodity
owner in so far as his own product has no use-value to him, but has
to acquire it first by being alienated. But in order to pay at the
expiration of the contract, he must have sold commodities before that.
Thus, entirely apart from his individual wants, the movement of the
circulation process makes selling a social necessity with every owner
of commodities. As a former buyer of a commodity he is compelled to
become a seller of another commodity in order to get money not as a
means of purchase but as a means of payment, as the absolute form of
exchange value. The conversion of commodity into money as a final act,
or the first metamorphosis of a commodity as an end in itself which in
the case of hoarding seemed to be a matter of caprice on the part of
the commodity owner, becomes now an economic function. The motive and
essence of sale for the sake of payment becomes from a mere form of the
process of circulation its self emanating substance.

In this form of sale the commodity completes its change of position;
it circulates while it postpones its first metamorphosis, viz. its
transformation into money. On the contrary, on the part of the buyer
the second metamorphosis is completed, i. e. money is reconverted
into a commodity before the first metamorphosis has taken place,
i. e., before the commodity has been turned into money. The first
metamorphosis thus takes place after the second in point of time;
and thereby, money i. e. the form of the commodity in its first
metamorphosis, acquires a new destination. Money or the spontaneous
development of exchange value, is no longer a mere intermediary form of
the circulation of commodities, but its final result.

That such _time sales_ in which the two poles of the sale are separated
in point of time, have their natural origin in the simple circulation
of commodities, requires no elaborate proof. In the first place, the
development of circulation leads to a continual repetition of the
mutual transactions between the same commodity owners who confront
each other as seller and buyer. The repetition is not accidental; on
the contrary, goods are ordered, let us say, for a certain date in the
future when they are to be delivered and paid for. In that case the
sale is ideal, i. e. it is legally accomplished without the actual
presence of the goods and money. Both forms of money, those of a medium
of circulation and of a means of payment still coincide here, since
in the first place, commodity and money change places simultaneously,
and secondly, the money does not buy the commodity, but realizes the
price of the commodity purchased before. In the second place, the
nature of a great many use-values makes the simultaneous alienation
and delivery of the goods impossible, and delivery has to be postponed
for a certain time; e. g., when the use of a house is sold for one
month, the use-value of the house is delivered only at the expiration
of the month, although it changes hands at the beginning of the month.
Since the actual transfer of the use-value and its virtual alienation
are separated here in point of time, the realization of its price
occurs also after its change of place. Finally, the difference in
the seasons and in the length of time required for the production of
various commodities brings about a situation where one tries to sell
his goods, while the other is not ready to buy; and with the repeated
purchases and sales between the same commodity owners the two ends
of sale fall apart according to the conditions of production of the
respective commodities. Thus arises a relation of creditor and debtor
between the owners of commodities which, though constituting the
natural foundation of the credit system, may be fully developed before
the latter comes into existence. It is clear that with the extension
of the credit system, and, consequently, with the development of the
capitalist system of production in general, the function of money as a
means of payment will extend at the expense of its function as a means
of purchase and, still more, as an element of hoarding. In England, e.
g., money as coin has been almost completely banished into the sphere
of retail and petty trade between producers and consumers, while it
dominates the sphere of large commercial transactions as a means of
payment.[105]

As the universal means of payment money becomes the _universal
commodity_ of all contracts, at first only in the sphere of
circulation of commodities.[106] But with the development of this
function of money, all other forms of payment are gradually converted
into money payments. The extent to which money is developed as the
exclusive means of payment indicates the degree to which exchange value
has taken hold of production in its depth and breadth.[107]

The volume of money in circulation, as a means of payment, is
determined in the first place, by the amount of payments, i. e. by the
sum total of the prices of the commodities alienated, but not about to
be alienated, as in the case of the simple circulation of money. The
quantity thus determined is subject, however, to two modifications.
The first modification is due to the rapidity with which the same
piece of money repeats the same function, i. e. with which the several
payments succeed one another. A pays B, whereupon B pays C, and so
forth. The rapidity with which the same coin repeats its function
as a means of payment, depends first, upon the continuity of the
relation of creditor and debtor among the owners of commodities, the
same commodity owner being the creditor of one person and the debtor
of another, etc., and secondly, upon the interval which separates the
times of various payments. This chain of payments or of supplementary
first metamorphoses of commodities is qualitatively different from the
chain of metamorphoses which is formed by the circulation of money as a
circulating medium. The latter not only makes its appearance gradually,
but is even formed in that manner. A commodity is first converted
into money, then again into a commodity, thereby enabling another
commodity to become money, etc.; or, seller becomes buyer, whereby
another commodity owner turns seller. This successive connection is
accidentally formed in the very process of the exchange of commodities.
But when the money which A has paid to B is passed on from B to C,
from C to D, etc., and that, too, at intervals rapidly succeeding one
another, then this external connection reveals but an already existing
social connection. The same money passes through different hands not
because it appears as a means of payment; it passes as a means of
payment because the different hands have already clasped each other.
The rapidity with which money circulates as a means of payment thus
shows that individuals have been drawn into the process of circulation
much deeper than would be indicated by the same rapidity of the
circulation of money as coin or as a means of purchase.

The sum total of prices made up by all the purchases and sales taking
place at the same time, and, therefore, side by side, constitutes the
limit for the substitution of the volume of coin by the rapidity of its
circulation. If the payments that are to be made simultaneously are
concentrated at one place―which naturally arises at first at points
where the circulation of commodities is largest―the payments balance
each other as negative and positive quantities: A is under obligations
to pay B, while he has to be paid by C. etc. The quantity of money
required as a means of payment will, therefore, be determined not by
the total amount of payments which have to be made simultaneously, but
by the greater or less concentration of the same and by the magnitude
of the balance remaining after their mutual neutralization as negative
and positive quantities. Special arrangements are made for settlements
of this kind even where the credit system is not developed at all,
as was the case e. g. in ancient Rome. The consideration of these
arrangements, however, as well as that of the general time limits of
payment, which are everywhere established among certain elements in the
community, does not belong here. We may add that the specific influence
which these time settlements exert on the periodic fluctuations in the
quantity of money in circulation, has been scientifically investigated
but lately.

In so far as the payments mutually balance as positive and negative
quantities, no money actually appears on the scene. It figures here
only in its capacity of a measure of value: first, in the prices of
commodities, and second, in the magnitude of mutual obligations. Aside
from its ideal form, exchange value does not exist here independently,
not even in the form of a token of value; that is to say, money plays
here only the part of ideal money of account. The function of money
as a means of payment thus implies a contradiction. On the one hand,
in so far as payments balance, it serves only ideally as a measure of
value. On the other hand, in so far as a payment has actually to be
made, money enters circulation not as a transient circulating medium,
but as the final resting form of the universal equivalent, as the
absolute commodity, in a word, as money. Therefore, whenever such a
thing as a chain of payments and an artificial system of settling them,
is developed, money suddenly changes its visionary nebulous shape as a
measure of value, turning into hard cash or means of payment, as soon
as some shock causes a violent interruption of the flow of payments and
disturbs the mechanism of their settlement. Thus, under conditions of
fully developed capitalist production, where the commodity owner has
long become a capitalist, knows his Adam Smith, and condescendingly
laughs at the superstition that gold and silver alone constitute money
or that money differs at all from other commodities as the absolute
commodity, money suddenly reappears not as a medium of circulation,
but as the only adequate form of exchange value, as the only form of
wealth, exactly as it is looked upon by the hoarder. In its capacity
of such an exclusive form of wealth, it reveals itself, unlike under
the monetary system, not in mere imaginary, but in actual depreciation
and worthlessness of all material wealth. That is what constitutes
the particular phase of crises of the world market which is known as
a money crisis. The _summum bonum_ for which everybody is crying at
such times as for the only form of wealth, is cash, hard cash; and by
the side of it all other commodities just because they are use-values,
appear useless like so many trifles and toys, or, as our Dr. Martin
Luther says, as mere objects of ornament and gluttony. This sudden
reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps
theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers by
whose agency circulation is affected shudder before the impenetrable
mystery in which their own economical relations are involved.[108]

Payments, in their turn, require the formation of reserve funds,
the accumulation of money as a means of payment. The building up of
reserve funds appears no longer as a practice carried on outside of
the sphere of circulation, as in the case of hoarding; nor as a mere
technical accumulation of coin, as in the case of coin reserves; on the
contrary, money must now be gradually accumulated to be available on
certain future dates when payments become due. While hoarding, in its
abstract form as a means of enrichment, declines with the development
of the capitalist system of production, that species of hoarding which
is directly called for by the process of production, increases; or, to
put it differently, a part of the treasure which is generally formed
in the sphere of circulation of commodities, is absorbed as a reserve
fund of means of payment. The more developed the capitalist system of
production, the more these reserve funds are limited to the necessary
minimum. Locke, in his work “On the Lowering of Interest”[109]
furnishes interesting data with reference to the size of these reserve
funds in his time. They show what a considerable part of the total
money in circulation the reservoirs for means of payment absorbed in
England just at the time when banking began to develop.

The law as to quantity of money in circulation, as it has been
formulated in the analysis of the simple circulation of money, receives
an essential modification when the circulation of the means of payment
is taken into account. The rapidity of the circulation of money whether
as circulating medium or as means of payment―being given, the total
amount of money in circulation at a given time will be determined by
the sum total of the prices of commodities to be realized, _plus_ the
total amount of payments falling due at the same time, _minus_ the
amount of payments balancing each other. The general law that the
volume of money in circulation depends on the prices of commodities is
not affected by this in the least, since the extent of the payments
is itself determined by the prices stipulated in contracts. What is,
however, strikingly demonstrated, is that even if the rapidity of
circulation and the economy of payments be assumed to remain the same,
the sum total of the prices of the commodities circulating in a given
period of time, say one day, and the volume of money in circulation on
the same day are by no means equal, because there is a large number
of commodities in circulation whose prices have yet to be realized in
money at a future date, and there is a quantity of money in circulation
which constitutes the payment for commodities which have long gone out
of circulation. The latter amount will depend on the sum of payments
falling due on the same day although contracted for at entirely
different periods.

We have seen that a change in the values of gold and silver does not
affect their function as measures of value or money of account. But
this change is of decisive importance for money as a hoard, since
with the rise or fall of value of gold and silver, the total value
of a gold or silver hoard will also rise or fall. Of still greater
importance is the effect of this change on money as a means of payment.
The payment takes place after the sale of the commodity, or the money
serves in two different capacities at two different periods; first, as
a measure of value, then as a means of payment corresponding to the
measurement. If, during this interval, the value of the precious metals
or the labor-time necessary for their production undergoes a change,
the same quantity of gold or silver will be worth more or less when
it appears as a means of payment than what it was when it served as a
measure of value, i. e., when the contract was concluded. The function
of a particular commodity, like gold or silver, to serve as money or
independent exchange value comes here in conflict with the nature of
the particular commodity whose magnitude of value depends on changes in
the cost of its production. The great social revolution which caused
the fall in value of the precious metals in Europe, is as well known as
the revolution of an opposite character which had been brought about
at an early period in the history of the ancient Roman republic by the
rise in value of copper in terms of which the debts of the plebeians
had been contracted. Without attempting here to follow any further
the fluctuations of value of the precious metals and their effect on
the system of bourgeois political economy, it is at once apparent
that a fall in the value of the precious metals favors the debtors at
the expense of the creditors, while a rise in their value favors the
creditors at the expense of the debtors.


c. WORLD MONEY.

Gold becomes money as distinguished from coin only after it is
withdrawn from circulation in the shape of a hoard; it then enters
circulation as a non-medium of circulation, and finally breaks through
the barriers of home circulation to assume the part of a universal
equivalent in the world of commodities. It becomes _world money_.

While the general measures of weight of the precious metals served as
their original measures of value, the reverse process takes place now
in the world market, and the reckoning names of money are turned back
into corresponding weight names. In the same way, while shapeless crude
metal (aes rude) was the original form of the medium of circulation
and the coin form constituted but the official stamp certifying that a
given piece of metal was of a certain weight, now the precious metal
in its capacity of a world coin throws off its stamp and shape and
reassumes the indistinguishable bullion form; and even if national
coins, such as Russian imperials, Mexican dollars, and English
sovereigns, do circulate abroad, their name is of no importance,
and only their contents count. Finally, as international money, the
precious metals come again to perform their original function of
mediums of exchange, which, like the exchange of commodities, arose
first not within the various primitive communities, but at their points
of contact with one another. As world money, money thus reassumes its
primitive form. On leaving the sphere of home circulation, it strips
off the particular forms which it has acquired in the course of the
development of the process of exchange within that particular national
sphere, those local garbs of standard of price, of coin, of auxiliary
coin, and of token of value.

We have seen that in the home circulation of a country, only one
commodity serves as a measure of value. Since, however, that function
is performed by gold in some countries and by silver in others, there
is a double standard of value in the world market and money assumes
two forms in all its other functions. The translation of the values
of commodities from gold prices into silver prices and vice versa
depends in each case upon the relative value of the two metals, which
is constantly changing and, therefore, appears to be constantly in the
process of determination. Commodity owners in every national sphere
of circulation have to use gold and silver alternately for foreign
circulation and thus to exchange the metal which is accepted as money
at home for the metal which they happen to need as money abroad. Every
nation is, therefore, utilizing both metals, gold and silver, as world
money.

In the international circulation of commodities, gold and silver appear
not as mediums of circulation, but as universal mediums of exchange.
The universal medium of exchange performs its function only under its
two developed forms of a means of purchase and of a means of payment,
whose mutual relation in the world market is the very reverse of what
it is at home. In the sphere of home circulation, money in the form of
coin, played exclusively the part of a means of purchase, either as the
intermediary in the dynamic unity C―M―C or as the representative of the
transient form of exchange value in the unceasing change of positions
by commodities. In the world market it is just the contrary. Gold and
silver appear here as a means of purchase when the exchange of matter
is but one-sided, and purchase and sale do not coincide. The frontier
trade at Kiachta e. g. is both actually and according to treaty, one
of barter, in which silver plays only the part of a measure of value.
The war of 1857-58 compelled the Chinese to sell without buying. Silver
suddenly appeared now as a means of purchase. Out of regard to the
letter of the treaty, the Russians made up the French five frank coins
into crude silver commodities, which were made to serve as a means
of exchange. Silver has always served as a means of purchase between
Europe and America on one side and Asia on the other, where it settles
down in the form of hoards. Furthermore, the precious metals serve
as international means of purchase whenever the ordinary balance of
exchange of matter between two nations is suddenly upset, as e. g. when
a failure of crops forces one of them to buy on an extraordinary scale.
Finally, the precious metals are international means of purchase in
the hands of gold and silver producing countries, in which case they
directly constitute a product and commodity and not merely a converted
form of a commodity. The more the exchange of commodities between
different national spheres of circulation is developed, the more
important becomes the function of world money to serve as a _means of
payment_ for the settlement of international balances.

Like home circulation, international circulation requires a constantly
changing quantity of gold and silver. A part of the accumulated hoards
serves therefore, in each country as a reserve fund of world money,
which now declines, now rises, according to the fluctuations of the
exchange of commodities.[110] Besides the special movements which take
place between national spheres of circulation, world-money possesses
a universal movement, whose starting points are at the sources of
production from which gold and silver streams spread out in different
directions all over the world market. Here gold and silver enter the
world circulation as commodities and are exchanged for commodity
equivalents in proportion to the labor-time contained in them, before
they penetrate national spheres of circulation. In the latter, they
appear now with a given magnitude of value. Every fall or rise in the
cost of their production equally affects, therefore, their relative
value throughout the world market; on the other hand, that value is
entirely independent of the extent to which the different national
spheres of circulation absorb gold or silver. The part of the metal
stream which is caught up by every separate sphere in the world of
commodities, partly enters directly the home circulation of money
to make up for worn out coin; partly is dammed up in the different
reservoirs containing hoards of coin, means of payment and world-money;
partly is turned into articles of luxury, while the rest simply forms
a treasure. At an advanced stage of development of the capitalist
system of production the formation of hoards is reduced to the minimum
required by the various processes of circulation for the free play
of their mechanism. The hoard as such becomes idle wealth, unless it
appears as a temporary form of a surplus resulting from a favorable
balance of payments or as the result of an interrupted exchange of
matter, i. e. as the solidification of a commodity in its first
metamorphosis.

Gold and silver, in their capacity of money, being by conception
universal commodities, assume in their capacity of world money the
form adapted to a universal commodity. To the extent to which all
commodities are exchanged for them, they become the transformed
impersonation of all commodities and, therefore, universally alienable
commodities. Their function of serving as the embodiment of universal
labor-time is realized more and more as the interchange of matter
produced by concrete labor embraces increasing parts of the world.
They become universal equivalents to the extent to which the series
of particular equivalents which constitute their spheres of exchange,
increases. Since in the sphere of world circulation commodities unfold
their own exchange value on a universal scale, they assume the form
of world money when transformed into gold and silver. As commodity
owning nations are thus turning gold into money by their diversified
industry and universal trade, industry and trade appear to them only as
a means of getting money out of the world market in the shape of gold
and silver. Gold and silver, as world money, are, therefore, as much
products of the universal circulation of commodities as they are means
of widening its sphere. Like chemistry which grew up behind the backs
of the alchemists who tried to find a way of making gold, so do the
sources of world industry and world trade spring up behind the backs
of the owners of commodities, while they are hunting for the commodity
in its magic form. Gold and silver help to create the world market by
anticipating its existence in their conception of money. That this
magic effect of the precious metals is by no means confined to the
period of infancy of capitalist society but is a necessary outgrowth
of the perverse conception which the representatives of the commodity
world have of their own work in society, is shown by the extraordinary
influence exerted in the middle of the nineteenth century by the
discovery of new gold fields.

Just as money develops into world-money, so the commodity owner
develops into a cosmopolitan. The cosmopolitan relation of men is
originally only a relation of commodity owners. The commodity as such
rises above all religious, political, national, and language barriers.
Price is its universal language and money, its common form. But with
the development of world-money as distinguished from national coin,
there develops the cosmopolitanism of the commodity owner as the faith
of practical reason opposed to traditional, religious, national and
other prejudices which hinder the interchange of matter among mankind.
As the identical gold that lands in England in the form of American
eagles, turns there into sovereigns and three days later circulates in
Paris in the form of Napoleons, only to emerge in Venice in a few weeks
as so many ducats, retaining all the while the same value, it becomes
clear to the commodity owner that nationality “is but the guinea’s
stamp.” The lofty idea which he conceives of the entire world is that
of a market, the _world market_.[111]


4. THE PRECIOUS METALS.

The process of capitalist production first of all takes hold of the
metallic circulation as of a ready, transmitted organ which, though
undergoing a gradual transformation, always retains its fundamental
structure. The question as to why gold and silver and not other
commodities serve as money material falls outside the limits of the
capitalist system. We shall, therefore, confine ourselves to summing
up the most essential points.

Since universal labor-time admits of quantitative differences only,
the object which is to serve as its specific incarnation must be
capable of representing purely quantitative differences, i. e., it
must be homogeneous and uniform in quality throughout. That is the
first condition a commodity must satisfy to perform the function of
a measure of value. If commodities were estimated in oxen, hides,
grain, etc., they would really have to be estimated in an ideal average
ox, or average hide, since there are qualitative differences between
an ox and an ox, grain and grain, hide and hide. On the contrary,
gold and silver, as elementary substances, are always the same,
and equal quantities of them represent, therefore, values of equal
magnitude.[112] The other condition which a commodity that is to serve
as a universal equivalent must satisfy and which follows directly from
its function of representing purely quantitative differences, is that
it must be capable of being divided and re-united at will, so that
money of account may be represented materially as well. Gold and
silver possess these properties to a superior degree.

As mediums of circulation, gold and silver have this advantage over
other commodities, that their high specific gravity which condenses
much weight in little space, corresponds to their economic specific
gravity which condenses relatively much labor-time, i. e. a great
quantity of exchange value in a small volume. This insures facility
of transport, of transition from hand to hand and from one country to
another, the ability to appear as rapidly as to disappear, in short,
that material mobility which constitutes the _sine qua non_ of the
commodity that is to serve as the _perpetuum mobile_ of the process of
circulation.

The high specific value of the precious metals, their durability,
comparative indestructibility, insusceptibility of oxidation through
the action of the air, in the case of gold insolubility in acids
except in aqua regia,―all these natural properties make the precious
metals the natural material for hoarding. Peter Martyr who seems to
have been a great lover of chocolate, remarks, therefore, of the
cacao-bags which formed a species of Mexican gold: “O felicem monetam,
quae suavem utilemque praebet humano generi potum, et a tartarea peste
avaritiae suos immunes servat possessores, quod suffodi aut diu servari
nequeat.”[113]

The great importance of metals in general in the direct process of
production is due to the part they play as instruments of production.
Apart from their scarcity, the great softness of gold and silver as
compared with iron and even copper (in the hardened state in which it
was used by the ancients), makes them unfit for that application and
deprives them, therefore, to a great extent, of that property on which
the use-value of metals is generally based. Useless as they are in the
direct process of production, they are easily dispensed with as means
of existence, as articles of consumption. For that reason any desired
quantity of them may be absorbed by the social process of circulation
without disturbing the processes of direct production and consumption.
Their individual use-value does not come in conflict with their
economic function. Furthermore, gold and silver are not only negatively
superfluous, i. e. dispensable articles, but their aesthetic properties
make them the natural material of luxury, ornamentation, splendor,
festive occasions, in short, the positive form of abundance and wealth.
They appear, in a way, as spontaneous light brought out from the
underground world, since silver reflects all rays of light in their
original combination, and gold only the color of highest intensity,
viz. red light. The sensation of color is, generally speaking, the most
popular form of aesthetic sense. The etymological connection between
the names of the precious metals, and the relations of colors, in the
different Indo-Germanic languages has been established by Jacob Grimm
(see his History of the German Language).

Finally, the susceptibility of gold and silver of being turned from
coin into bullion, from bullion into articles of luxury and vice versa,
i. e. the advantage they possess as against other commodities in not
being tied down to a definite, exclusive form in which they can be
used, makes them the natural material of money, which must constantly
change from one form to another.

Nature no more produces money than it does bankers or discount
rates. But since the capitalist system of production requires the
crystallization of wealth as a fetich in the form of a single article,
gold and silver appear as its appropriate incarnation. Gold and silver
are not money by nature, but money is by nature gold and silver. In the
first place, the silver or gold money crystal is not only the product
of the process of circulation, but in fact its only final product. In
the second place, gold and silver are ready and direct products of
nature, not distinguished by any difference of form. The universal
product of the social process or the social process itself as a product
is a peculiar natural product, a metal hidden in the bowels of the
earth and extracted therefrom.[114]

We have seen that gold and silver are unable to fulfill the
requirements which they are expected to meet in their capacity of
money, viz. to remain values of unvarying magnitude. Still, as
Aristotle had already observed, they possess a more constant value than
the average of other commodities. Apart from the universal effect of an
appreciation or depreciation of the precious metals, the fluctuations
in the ratio between the values of gold and silver has a special
importance, since both serve side by side in the world market as money
material. The purely economic causes of this change of value must be
traced to the change in the labor-time required for the production of
these metals; conquests and other political upheavals which exercised
a great influence on the value of metals in the ancient world, have
nowadays only a local and transitory effect. The labor-time required
for the production of the metals will depend on the degree of their
natural scarcity, as well as on the greater or less difficulty with
which they can be obtained in a purely metallic state. As a matter of
fact, gold is the first metal discovered by man. This is due to the
fact that nature itself furnishes it partly in pure crystalline form,
individualized, free from chemical combination with other substances,
or, as the alchemists used to say, in a virgin state; and so far as
it does not appear in that state, nature does the technical work in
the great gold washeries of rivers. Only the crudest kind of labor is
thus required of man in the extraction of gold, either from rivers or
from alluvial deposits; while the extraction of silver presupposes the
development of mining and a comparatively high degree of technical
skill generally. For that reason the value of silver is originally
greater than that of gold in spite of the lesser absolute scarcity of
the former. Strabo’s assertion that a certain Arabian tribe gave ten
pounds of gold for one pound of iron and two pounds of gold for one
pound of silver, seems by no means incredible. But as the productive
powers of labor in society are developed and the product of unskilled
labor rises in value as compared with the product of skilled labor;
as the earth’s crust is more thoroughly broken up and the original
superficial sources of gold supply give out, the value of silver begins
to fall in proportion to that of gold. At a given stage of development
of engineering and of the means of communication, the discovery of
new gold or silver fields become the decisive factor. In ancient Asia
the ratio of gold to silver was 6 to 1 or 8 to 1; the latter ratio
prevailed in China and Japan as late as the beginning of the nineteenth
century; 10 to 1, the ratio in Xenophon’s time, may be considered as
the average ratio of the middle period of antiquity. The exploitation
of the Spanish silver mines by Carthage and later by Rome had about the
same effect in antiquity, as the discovery of the American mines in
modern Europe. For the period of the Roman empire 15 or 16 to 1 may be
assumed as a rough average, although we frequently find cases of still
greater depreciation of silver in Rome. The same movement beginning
with the relative depreciation of gold and concluding with the fall
in the value of silver, is repeated in the following epoch which has
lasted from the Middle Ages to the present time. As in Xenophon’s times
the average ratio in the Middle Ages was 10 to 1, changing to 16 or
15 to 1 in consequence of the discovery of the American mines. The
discovery of the Australian, Californian and Columbian gold sources
makes a new fall in the value of gold probable.[115]


C. THEORIES OF THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND OF MONEY.

As the universal thirst for gold prompted nations and princes in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the period of infancy of modern
bourgeois society, to crusades beyond the sea in search of the golden
grail,[116] the first interpreters of the modern world, the founders
of the monetary system, of which the mercantile system is but a
variation, proclaimed gold and silver, i. e. money, as the only thing
that constitutes wealth. They were quite right when, from the point
of view of the simple circulation of commodities, they declared that
the mission of bourgeois society was to make money, i. e. to build up
everlasting treasures which neither moth nor rust could eat. It is
no argument with the monetary system to say that a ton of iron whose
price is £3 constitutes a value of the same magnitude as £3 worth
of gold. The point here is not the magnitude of the exchange value,
but as to what constitutes its adequate form. If the monetary and
mercantile systems single out international trade and the particular
branches of national industry directly connected with that trade as
the only true sources of wealth or money, it must be borne in mind,
that in that period the greater part of national production was still
carried on under forms of feudalism and was the source from which
producers drew directly their means of subsistence. Products, as a
rule, were not turned into commodities nor, therefore, into money;
they did not enter into the general social interchange of matter; did
not, therefore, appear as embodiments of universal abstract labor;
and did not, in fact, constitute bourgeois wealth. Money as the end
and object of circulation is exchange value or abstract wealth, but
it is no material element of wealth and does not form the directing
goal and impelling motive of production. True to the conditions as
they prevailed in that primitive stage of bourgeois production, those
unrecognized prophets held fast to the pure, tangible, and resplendent
form of exchange value, to its form of a universal commodity as against
all special commodities. The proper bourgeois economic sphere of that
period was the sphere of the circulation of commodities. Hence, they
judged the entire complex process of bourgeois production from the
point of view of that elementary sphere and confounded money with
capital. The unceasing war of modern economists against the monetary
and mercantile system is mostly due to the fact that this system blabs
out in brutally naive fashion, the secret of bourgeois production, viz.
its subjection to the domination of exchange value. Ricardo, though
wrong in the application he makes of it, remarks somewhere that even in
times of famine, grain is imported not because the nation is starving,
but because the grain dealer is making money. In its criticism of the
monetary and mercantile system, political economy, by attacking that
system as a mere illusion and as a false theory, fails to recognize in
it the barbaric form of its own fundamental principles. Furthermore,
this system has not only an historic justification, but within
certain spheres of modern economy retains until now the full rights
of citizenship. At all stages of the bourgeois system of production
in which wealth assumes the elementary form of a commodity, exchange
value assumes the elementary form of money and in all phases of the
process of production wealth reassumes for a moment the universal
elementary commodity form. Even at the most advanced stage of bourgeois
economy, the specific functions of gold and silver to serve as money,
in contradistinction to their function of mediums of circulation―a
function which distinguishes them from all other commodities―is not
done away with, but only limited, hence the monetary and mercantile
system retains its right of citizenship. The Catholic fact that gold
and silver are contrasted with other profane commodities as the direct
incarnation of social labor, that is as the expression of abstract
wealth, naturally offends the Protestant point d’honneur of bourgeois
economy, and out of fear of the prejudices of the monetary system
it had lost for a long time its grasp of the phenomena of money
circulation, as will be shown presently.

It was quite natural that, contrary to the monetary and mercantile
system which knew money only in its form of a crystallized product
of circulation, classical political economy should have conceived
money first of all in its fluent form of exchange value arising and
disappearing within the process of the metamorphosis of commodities.
And since the circulation of commodities is regarded exclusively in the
form of C―M―C and the latter in its turn, exclusively in its aspect of
a dynamic unity of sale and purchase, money comes to be regarded in
its capacity of a medium of circulation as opposed to its capacity of
money. And when that medium of circulation is isolated in its function
of coin, it turns, as we have seen, into a token of value. But since
classical political economy had to deal with metallic circulation as
the prevailing form of circulation, it defined metallic money as coin,
and metallic coin as a mere token of value. In accordance with the
law governing the circulation of tokens of value, the proposition was
advanced that the prices of commodities depend on the quantity of money
in circulation instead of the opposite principle that the quantity of
money in circulation depends on the prices of commodities. We find
this view more or less clearly expressed by the Italian economists of
the seventeenth century; LOCKE now asserts, now denies that principle;
it is clearly elaborated in the “Spectator” (of October 19, 1711)
by MONTESQUIEU AND HUME. Since Hume was by far the most important
representative of this theory in the eighteenth century, we shall
commence our review with him.

Under certain assumptions, an increase or decrease in the quantity
either of the metallic money in circulation, or of the tokens of value
in circulation seems to affect _uniformly_ the prices of commodities.
With each fall or rise of the _value_ of gold or silver in which the
exchange values of commodities are estimated as prices, there is a rise
or fall of prices, because of the change in their measure of value; as
a result of the rise or fall of prices, a greater or smaller quantity
of gold and silver is circulating as coin. But the apparent phenomenon
is the fall in prices―the exchange value of commodities remaining the
same―accompanied by an increased or diminished quantity of the medium
of circulation. On the other hand, if the quantity of tokens of value
rises above or falls below its required level, it is forcibly reduced
to the latter by a fall or rise of prices. In either case the same
effect seems to be brought about by the same cause, and Hume holds fast
to this semblance.

Every scientific inquiry into the relation between the volume of the
circulating medium and the movement of prices must assume the value
of the money material as given. Hume, on the contrary, considers
exclusively periods of revolution in the value of the precious metals,
i. e. revolutions in the measure of value. The rise of prices which
occurred simultaneously with the increase of metallic money after the
discovery of the American mines forms the historical background of his
theory, while his polemic against the monetary and mercantile system
furnishes its practical motive. The importation of precious metals can
naturally increase while their cost of production remains the same.
On the other hand, a decrease in their value, i. e. in the labor-time
required for their production will reveal itself first of all in
their increased imports. Hence, said the later followers of Hume, a
decrease in the value of the precious metals, reveals itself in an
increased volume of the circulating medium, and the increased volume
of the latter is shown in the rise of prices. As a matter of fact,
however, the rise in price affects only exported commodities, which
are exchanged for gold and silver as commodities and not as mediums
of circulation. Thus, the prices of these commodities, which are now
estimated in gold and silver of lower value, rise as compared with
the prices of all other commodities whose exchange value continues
to be estimated in gold or silver according to the standard of their
old cost of production. This twofold appraisement of the exchange
values of commodities in the same country can naturally be only
temporary, and the gold and silver prices must become equalized in
the proportions determined by the exchange values themselves, so that
finally the exchange values of all commodities come to be estimated
according to the new value of the money material. The development of
this process, as well as the ways and means in which the exchange value
of commodities asserts itself within the limits of the fluctuations
of market prices, do not fall within the scope of this work. But that
this equalization takes place but gradually in the early periods of
development of bourgeois production and extends over long periods of
time, never keeping pace with the increase of cash in circulation,
has been strikingly demonstrated by new critical investigations of
the movement of prices of commodities in the sixteenth century.[117]
The favorite references of Hume’s followers to the rise of prices
in ancient Rome in consequence of the conquests of Macedonia, Egypt
and Asia Minor, are quite irrelevant. The characteristic method of
antiquity of suddenly transferring hoarded treasures from one country
to another, which was accomplished by violence and thus brought about
a temporary reduction of the cost of production of precious metals
in a certain country by the simple process of plunder, affects just
as little the intrinsic laws of money circulation, as the gratuitous
distribution of Egyptian and Sicilian grain in Rome affected the
universal law governing the price of grain. Hume, as well as all
other writers of the eighteenth century, was not in possession of the
material necessary for the detailed observation of the circulation
of money. This material, which first becomes available with the full
development of banking, includes in the first place a critical history
of prices of commodities, and in the second, official and current
statistics relating to the expansion and contraction of the circulating
medium, the imports and exports of the precious metals, etc. Hume’s
theory of circulation may be summed up in the following propositions:
1. The prices of commodities in a country are determined by the
quantity of money existing there (real or symbolic money); 2. The
money current in a country represents all the commodities to be found
there. In proportion “as there is more or less of this representation,”
i. e. of money, “there goes a greater or less quantity of the thing
represented to the same quantity of it”; 3. If commodities increase
in quantity, their price falls or the value of money rises. If money
increases in quantity, then, on the contrary, the price of commodities
rises and the value of money declines.[118]

“The dearness of everything,” says Hume, “from plenty of money, is a
disadvantage, which attends an established commerce, and sets bounds
to it in every country, by enabling the poorer states to undersell
the richer in all foreign markets.”[119] “Where coin is in greater
plenty; as a greater quantity of it is required to represent the same
quantity of goods; it can have no effect, either good or bad, taking
a nation within itself; any more than it would make an alteration on
a merchant’s books, if, instead of the Arabian method of notation,
which requires few characters, he should make use of the Roman, which
requires a great many. Nay, the greater quantity of money, like the
Roman characters, is rather inconvenient, and requires greater trouble
both to keep and transport it.”[120] In order to prove anything, Hume
should have shown that under a _given_ system of notation the quantity
of characters used does not depend on the magnitude of the numbers,
but that on the contrary, the magnitude of the numbers depends on
the quantity of the characters used. It is perfectly true that there
is no advantage in estimating or “counting” values of commodities
in depreciated gold and silver, and that is the reason why nations
have always found it more convenient with the growth of the value
of the commodities in circulation to count in silver in preference
to copper, and in gold rather than in silver. In proportion as the
nations became richer, they converted the less valuable metals into
subsidiary coin and the more valuable ones into money. Furthermore,
Hume forgets that in order to count values in gold and silver, it is
not necessary that either gold or silver should be “on hand.” Money of
account and the medium of circulation are identical with him and both
are “coin.” Hume concludes that a rise or fall of prices depends on
the quantity of money in circulation, because a change in the value
of the measure of value, i. e. of the precious metals which serve as
money of account, causes a rise or fall of prices and, consequently,
also a change in the amount of money in circulation, the rapidity of
the latter remaining the same. That not only the quantity of gold and
silver increased in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but that
the cost of their production had declined at the same time, Hume could
know from the closing up of the European mines. In the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries the prices of commodities increased in Europe
with the influx of the mass of American gold and silver; hence the
prices of commodities in every land are determined by the mass of
gold and silver to be found there. This was Hume’s first “necessary
consequence.”[121] In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries prices
had not risen uniformly with the increase of the quantity of precious
metals; more than half a century passed before _any_ change in
prices became perceptible, and even then it took a long time before
the exchange values of commodities came to be generally estimated
according to the depreciated value of gold and silver, i. e. before the
revolution affected the general price level. Hence, concludes Hume,
who, quite contrary to the principles of his philosophy, generalizes
indiscriminately from imperfectly observed facts, prices of commodities
or the value of money depend not on the total amount of money to be
found in the country, but rather on the quantity of gold and silver
which is actually in circulation; but in the long run all the gold
and silver in the country must be absorbed by circulation in the
form of coin.[122] It is clear that if gold and silver have a value
of their own, then, apart from all other laws of circulation, only a
definite quantity of gold and silver can circulate as the equivalent
of commodities of a given value. If, therefore, every quantity of gold
and silver which happens to be in a country must enter the sphere of
exchange of commodities as a medium of circulation without regard
to the total value of the commodities, then gold and silver have no
intrinsic value and are in fact no real commodities. That is Hume’s
third “necessary consequence.” He makes commodities enter the process
of circulation without price and gold and silver without value. That
is the reason why he never speaks of the value of commodities and of
gold, but only of their relative quantities. Locke had already said
that gold and silver had merely an imaginary or conventional value; the
first brutal expression of opposition to the assertion of the monetary
“system” that gold and silver alone have true value. That gold and
silver owe their character of money to the function they perform in
the social process of exchange is interpreted to the effect that they
owe their own value and therefore the magnitude of their value to a
social function.[123] Gold and silver are thus worthless things, which,
however, acquire a fictitious value within the sphere of circulation
_as representatives of commodities_. They are converted by the process
of circulation not into money, but into value. This value of theirs is
determined by the proportion between their own volume and that of the
commodities, since the two must balance each other. Thus, Hume makes
gold and silver enter the world of commodities as non-commodities;
but as soon as they appear in the form of coin, he turns them, on
the contrary, into mere commodities, which must be exchanged for
other commodities by simple barter. In that manner, if the world of
commodities consisted of but one commodity, say one million quarters
of grain, the idea would work itself out very simply; viz., one
quarter of grain would be exchanged for two ounces of gold if there
were altogether two million ounces of gold, and for twenty ounces of
gold, if there were a total of twenty million ounces, the price of the
commodity and the value of money rising or falling in inverse ratio to
the quantity of gold in existence.[124] But the world of commodities
consists of an endless variety of use-values, whose relative values are
by no means determined by their relative quantities. How, then, does
Hume conceive this exchange of the volume of commodities for the volume
of gold? He contents himself with the meaningless, hollow idea that
every commodity is exchanged as an aliquot part of the entire volume of
commodities for a corresponding aliquot part of the volume of gold. The
process of the movement of commodities due to the antagonism between
exchange value and use-value which commodities bear within themselves,
and which manifests itself in the circulation of money, becoming
crystallized in different forms of the latter, is thus done away with,
giving place to the imaginary mechanical equalization process between
the quantity of precious metals to be found in a country and the volume
of commodities existing there at the same time.

SIR JAMES STEUART opens his inquiry into the nature of coin and
money with an elaborate criticism of Hume and Montesquieu.[125] He
is really the first to ask this question: is the quantity of current
money determined by the prices of commodities, or are the prices of
commodities determined by the quantity of current money? Although his
analysis is obscured by his fantastic conception of the measure of
value, his vacillating view of exchange value and by reminiscences
of the mercantile system, he discovers the essential forms of money
and the general laws of the circulation of money, because he makes
no attempt at a mechanical separation of commodities from money, but
proceeds to develop its different functions from the different aspects
of the exchange of commodities. Money is used, he says, for two
principal purposes: for the payment of debts and for the purchase of
what one needs; the two together form “ready money demands.” The state
of trade and industry, the mode of living, the customary expenditures
of the people, taken all together regulate and determine the volume
of “ready money demands,” i. e. the number of “alienations.” In order
to effect this multitude of payments, a certain proportion of money
is required. This proportion may increase or decrease according to
circumstances, even while the number of alienations remains the same.
At any rate, the circulation of a country can absorb only a definite
quantity of money.[126] “It is the complicated operations of demand
and competition which determines the standard price of everything”;
the latter “does not in the least depend on the quantity of gold and
silver in the country.”[127] What then will become of the gold and
silver that is not required as coin? They are hoarded or used in the
manufacture of articles of luxury. If the quantity of gold and silver
fall below the level required for circulation, symbolic money or other
substitutes take its place. If a favorable rate of exchange brings
about a surplus of money in the country and cuts off at the same time
the demand for its shipment abroad, it will accumulate in strong-boxes,
where the “riches will remain without producing more effect than if
they had remained in the mine.”

The second law discovered by Steuart is that of the reflux of credit
circulation to its starting point. Finally, he works out the effects
which the disparity of the rates of interest in different countries
produces upon the international export and import of precious
metals. The last two points we mention here only for the sake of
completeness, since they have but a remote bearing on the subject of
our discussion.[128] Symbolic money or credit money―Steuart does not
as yet distinguish between the two forms of money―may take the place
of precious metals as a means of purchase or means of payment in the
sphere of home circulation, but never in the world market. Paper notes
are therefore “money of the society,” while gold and silver are “money
of the world.”[129]

It is characteristic of nations with an “historical” development, in
the sense in which the term is used by the historical school of law,
to keep forgetting their own history. Although the controversy as to
the relation of prices of commodities to the volume of the circulating
medium has been continually agitating Parliament for the last half a
century, and has precipitated in England thousands of pamphlets, large
and small, Steuart has remained even more of a “dead dog” than Spinoza
seemed to be to Moses Mendelson in Lessing’s time. Even the latest
writer on the history of “currency,” Maclaren, makes Adam Smith the
original author of Steuart’s theory, and Ricardo of Hume’s theory.[130]
While Ricardo elaborated Hume’s theory, Adam Smith registered the
results of Steuart’s investigations as dead facts. Adam Smith applied
the Scotch saying that “mony mickles mak a muckle” even to his
spiritual wealth, and therefore concealed with petty care the sources
to which he owed the little out of which he tried to make so much.
More than once he prefers to break off the point of the discussion,
whenever he feels that an attempt on his part clearly to formulate the
question would compel him to settle his accounts with his predecessors.
So in the case of the money theory. He tacitly adopts Steuart’s theory
when he says that the gold and silver existing in a country is partly
utilized as coin; partly accumulated in the form of reserve funds for
merchants in countries without banks, or of bank reserves in countries
with a credit currency; partly serves as a hoard for the settling of
international payments; partly is turned into articles of luxury. He
passes over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in
circulation, treating money quite wrongly as a mere commodity.[131]
His vulgarizer, the dull J. B. Say, whom the French have proclaimed
_prince de la science_―like Johann Christoph Gottsched, who proclaimed
his Schönaich a Homer and himself a Pietro Aretino to the _terror
principum and lux mundi_―has with great pomp raised this not altogether
innocent oversight of Adam Smith to a dogma.[132] It must be said,
however, that his hostile attitude to the illusions of the mercantile
system prevented Adam Smith from taking an objective view of the
phenomena of metallic circulation, while his views on credit money are
original and deep. As in the eighteenth century petrification theories
there is always felt the presence of an undercurrent which springs from
either a critical or apologetic attitude toward the biblical tradition
of the flood, so there is concealed behind all the money theories of
the eighteenth century a secret struggle with the monetary system, the
ghost which had stood guard over the cradle of bourgeois economy and
continued to throw its shadow over legislation.

In the nineteenth century, inquiries into the nature of money were not
prompted directly by phenomena of metallic circulation, but rather by
those of bank-note circulation. The former was touched upon only in
order to discover the laws governing the latter. The suspension of
specie payments by the Bank of England in 1797, the rise of prices of
many commodities which followed it, the fall of the mint price of gold
below its market price, the depreciation of bank-notes, especially
since 1809, furnished the direct practical occasion for a party
struggle in parliament and a theoretical tournament outside of it,
both conducted with like passion. The historical background for the
controversy was furnished by the history of paper money during the
eighteenth century: the fiasco of Law’s bank; the depreciation of the
provincial bank-notes of the English Colonies in North America from the
beginning to the middle of the eighteenth century which went hand in
hand with the increase in the number of tokens of value; further, the
Continental bills issued as legal tender by the American government
during the War of Independence; and finally, the experiment with the
French _assignats_ carried out on a still larger scale. Most of the
English writers of that period confound the circulation of bank-notes,
which is governed by quite different laws, with the circulation of
tokens of value or government legal tender paper money; and while they
claim to explain the phenomena of this legal tender circulation by the
laws of metallic circulation, they proceed, as a matter of fact, just
the opposite way, viz., deducting laws for the latter from phenomena
observed in connection with the former. We omit all the numerous
writers of the period of 1800-1809 and turn directly to RICARDO, both
because he embodies the views of his predecessors, which he formulates
with greater precision, and because the shape he gave to the theory of
money governs English bank legislation until this moment. Ricardo, like
his predecessors, confounds the circulation of bank-notes, or credit
money, with the circulation of mere tokens of value. The fact which
impresses him most is the depreciation of paper currency accompanied by
the rise of prices of commodities. What the American mines had been to
Hume, the paper-bill presses in Threadneedle street were to Ricardo,
and he himself expressly identifies the two factors at some place in
his works. His first writings, which dealt exclusively with the money
question belong to the time of the most violent controversy between
the Bank of England, which had on its side the ministers and the war
party, and its opponents about whom were centered the parliamentary
opposition, the Whigs and the Peace party. They appeared as immediate
forerunners of the famous Report of the Bullion Committee of 1810, in
which Ricardo’s views were adopted.[133] The singular circumstance,
that Ricardo and his adherents, who held money to be merely a token
of value, are called bullionists, is due not only to the name of that
committee, but also to the nature of their theory. In his work on
political economy, Ricardo repeated and developed further the same
views, but nowhere has he investigated the nature of money as such, as
he had done in the case of exchange value, profit, rent, etc.

To begin with, Ricardo determines the value of gold and silver, like
that of all other commodities, by the quantity of labor-time embodied
in them.[134] By means of them, as commodities of a given value, the
values of all other commodities are measured.[135] The volume of the
circulating medium in a country is determined by the value of the
unit of measure of money on the one hand, and by the sum total of
the exchange values of commodities, on the other. This quantity is
modified by economy in the method of payment.[136] Since the quantity
of money, of a given value, which can be absorbed by circulation,
is thus determined and since the value of money within the sphere of
circulation manifests itself only in its quantity, it follows that
mere tokens of value, if issued in proportions determined by the value
of money, may replace it in circulation, and in fact, “a currency is
in its most perfect state when it consists wholly of paper money, but
of paper money of an equal value with the gold which it professes
to represent.”[137] So far Ricardo determines the volume of the
circulating medium by the prices of commodities, assuming the value of
money to be given; money as a token of value means with him a token of
a definite quantity of gold and not a mere worthless representative of
commodities as was the case with Hume.

When Ricardo suddenly gets off the straight path of his presentation
and takes the very opposite view, he does so to turn his attention
to the international circulation of precious metals and thus brings
confusion into the problem by introducing considerations that are
foreign to the subject. Let us follow his own course of reasoning, and,
in order to remove everything that is artificial and incidental, let
us assume that the gold and silver mines are located in the interior
of the countries in which the precious metals circulate as money.
The only inference which follows from Ricardo’s reasoning as so far
developed, is that, the value of gold being given, the quantity of
money in circulation will be determined by the prices of commodities.
Thus, at a given moment, the quantity of gold in circulation in a
country is simply determined by the exchange value of the commodities
in circulation. Let us suppose now that the sum total of these exchange
values has declined either because there are less commodities produced
at the old exchange values, or because, in consequence of an increased
productivity of labor, the same quantity of commodities has a smaller
value. Or, we may assume on the contrary that the sum total of exchange
values has increased, either because the quantity of commodities
has increased while the cost of their production has remained the
same, or because the value of the same or of a smaller quantity of
commodities has risen in consequence of a diminished productivity of
labor. What becomes in either case of the _given_ quantity of metal
in circulation? If gold is money merely because it is current as a
medium of circulation; if it is compelled to remain in circulation
like government legal tender paper money (and that is what Ricardo has
in mind), then the quantity of money in circulation will rise above
the normal level, as determined by the exchange value of the metal,
in the former case, and fall below that level in the latter. Although
possessing a value of its own, gold will become in the former case
a token of a metal of lower exchange value than its own, and in the
latter, a token of a metal of higher value. In the former case it will
remain as a token of value less than its own, in the latter greater
than its own (again an abstract deduction from legal tender paper
money). In the former case it is the same as though commodities were
estimated in a metal of lower value than gold, in the latter, as though
they were estimated in a metal of higher value. In the former case,
prices of commodities would rise therefore, in the latter they would
fall. In either case the movement of prices, their rise or fall, would
appear as the effect of a relative expansion or contraction of the
volume of gold in circulation above or below the level corresponding
to its own value, i. e. above or below the normal quantity which is
determined by the proportion between its own value and that of the
commodities in circulation.

The same process would take place if the sum total of the prices of
the commodities in circulation remained unchanged, while the volume
of gold in circulation came to be below or above the right level: the
former in case the gold coin worn out in the course of circulation
were not replaced by the production of a corresponding quantity of
gold in the mines; the latter, if the output of the mines exceeded the
requirements of circulation. In either case it is assumed that the cost
of production of gold or its value remain the same.

To sum up: the money in circulation is at its normal level, when its
volume is determined by its own bullion value, the exchange value of
commodities being given. It rises above that level, bringing about a
fall in the value of gold below its own bullion value and a rise of
prices of commodities, whenever the sum total of the exchange values of
commodities declines, or the output of gold from the mines increases.
It sinks below its right level, leading to a rise of gold above its
own bullion value and to a fall of prices of commodities, whenever the
sum total of the exchange values of the commodities or the gold output
of the mines is not sufficient to replace the quantity of outworn
gold. In either case the gold in circulation becomes a token of value
greater or smaller than that it really possesses. It may become an
appreciated or depreciated token of itself. As soon as all commodities
would come to be estimated in gold of this new value and the general
price level would accordingly rise or fall, the quantity of current
gold would again answer the requirements of circulation (a consequence
which Ricardo emphasizes with great pleasure), but would be at variance
with the cost of production of the precious metals and, therefore,
with their relation as commodities to all other commodities. According
to the general Ricardian theory of exchange value, the rise of gold
above its exchange value, i. e., above the value as determined by the
labor-time contained in it, would cause an increase in the production
of gold until the increased output of it would reduce its value to
the proper magnitude. And in the same manner, a fall of gold below
its value would cause a decline in its production until its value
rose again to its proper magnitude. By these opposite movements the
discrepancy between the bullion value of gold and its value as a medium
of circulation would disappear, the normal level of the volume of gold
in circulation would be restored, and the price level would again
correspond to the measure of value. These fluctuations in the value of
gold in circulation would to the same extent affect gold in the form
of bullion, because by assumption, all gold that is not utilized as an
article of luxury, is supposed to be in circulation. Since gold itself
may become, both as coin and bullion, a token of value of greater
or smaller magnitude than its bullion value, it is self understood
that convertible bank-notes in circulation have to share the same
fate. Although bank-notes are convertible, i. e. their real value and
nominal value agree, “the aggregate currency consisting of metal and of
convertible notes” may appreciate or depreciate according as to whether
it rises or falls, for reasons already stated, above or below the level
determined by the exchange value of the commodities in circulation
and the bullion value of gold. Inconvertible paper money, has, from
this point of view, only that advantage as against convertible paper
money, that it may depreciate in a twofold manner. It may fall below
the value of the metal which it is supposed to represent, because it
has been issued in too great quantity, or it may depreciate because
the metal it represents has itself fallen in value. This depreciation,
not of paper as compared with gold, but of gold and paper together,
or of the aggregate currency of a country, is one of the principal
discoveries of Ricardo, which Lord Overstone and Co. pressed into their
service and made a fundamental principle of Sir Robert Peele’s Bank
legislation of 1844 and 1845.

What should have been proven was that the price of commodities or the
value of gold depends on the quantity of gold in circulation. The
proof consists in the assumption of what is to be proven, viz. that
any quantity of the precious metal employed as money must become a
medium of circulation or coin, and thereby a token of value for the
commodities in circulation, no matter in what proportion to its own
intrinsic value and no matter what the total value of those commodities
may be. To put it differently, the proof consists in overlooking all
the other functions which money performs besides its function of a
medium of circulation. When hard pressed, as in his controversy with
Bosanquet, Ricardo, completely under the influence of the phenomenon of
depreciated tokens of value caused by their quality, takes recourse to
dogmatic assurances.[138]

If Ricardo had built up this theory by abstract reasoning, as we
have done it here, without introducing concrete facts and incidental
matters which only distract his attention from the main question, its
hollowness would be striking. But he takes up the entire subject in its
_international_ aspect. It will be easy to prove, however, that the
apparent magnitude of scale does not make his fundamental ideas less
diminutive.

His first proposition was as follows: the volume of metallic currency
is normal when it is determined by the total value of the commodities
in circulation estimated in its bullion value. Expressed so as to
apply to international conditions, it reads thus: in a normal state of
circulation every country possesses a quantity of money “according to
the state of its commerce and wealth.” Money circulates at a value
corresponding to its real value or to its cost of production, i. e.
it has the same value _in all countries_.[139] That being the case,
“there could be no temptation offered to either for their importation
or exportation.”[140] There would thus be established a balance of
currencies between the different countries. The normal level of a
national currency is now expressed in terms of an international
balance of currencies, which practically amounts to the statement that
nationality does not change anything in a universal economic law. We
have reached again the same fatal point as before. How is the normal
level disturbed? Or, speaking in terms of the new terminology, how is
the international balance of currencies disturbed? Or, how does money
cease to have the same value in all countries? Or, finally, how does
it cease to pass at its own value in every country? We have seen that
the normal level was disturbed by an increase or decrease of the volume
of money in circulation while the total value of commodities remained
the same; or, because the quantity of money in circulation remained
the same while the exchange values of commodities rose or fell. In the
same manner, the international level, determined by the value of the
metal itself, is disturbed by an increase in the quantity of gold in a
country brought about by the discovery of new gold mines,[141] or by
an increase or decrease of the total exchange-value of the circulating
commodities in any particular country. Just as in the former case the
output of the precious metals decreased or increased according as
to whether it was necessary to contract or expand the currency and
thereby to lower or raise prices, so are the same effects produced
now by export and import from one country to another. In the country
in which prices would rise or the value of gold would fall below the
bullion value in consequence of a redundant currency, gold would be
depreciated, and the prices of commodities would rise as compared with
other countries. Gold would, therefore, be exported, while commodities
would be imported, and vice versa. Just as in the former case the
output of gold, so now the import or export of gold and, with it, the
rise or fall of prices of commodities would continue until, as we would
have said before, the right value relation would be restored between
the metal and commodities, or as we shall say now, the international
balance of currencies would be restored. Just as in the former case
the production of gold increased or decreased because gold stood
above or below its value, so now the international migration of gold
would take place for the same reason. Just as in the former case,
every change in the production of the circulating metal affected its
quantity and, thereby, prices, so would the same effect be produced
now by international import and export. As soon as the relative values
of gold and commodities or the normal quantity of currency would be
restored, no further production would take place in the former case,
and no further export or import in the latter, except in so far as
would be necessary to replace outworn coin and to meet the demand of
manufacturers of articles of luxury. It follows “that the temptation to
export money in exchange for goods, or what is termed an unfavorable
balance of trade, never arises but from a redundant currency.”[142]
“The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not
the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance.”[143] Since the
increase or decrease in the production of gold in the former case and
the importation or exportation of gold in the latter, take place only
whenever its volume rises above or sinks below its normal level, i.
e. whenever gold appreciates or depreciates in comparison with its
bullion value, or whenever prices of commodities are too high or too
low; it follows that every such movement works as a corrective,[144]
since, through the resultant expansion or contraction of the currency,
prices are restored to their true level: in the former case this level
represents the balance between the respective values of gold and of
commodities; in the latter, the international balance of currencies. To
put it in other words: money circulates in different countries only in
so far as it circulates as coin in every country. Money is but coin and
all the gold existing in a country must therefore enter circulation,
i. e. it can rise above or fall below its value as a token of value.
Thus we safely land again, by the round-about way of this international
complication, at the simple dogma which constituted our starting point.

With what violence to actual facts Ricardo has to explain them in
the sense of his abstract theory, a few illustrations will suffice
to show. He maintains, e. g. that in years of poor crops, which
happened frequently in England during 1800-1820, gold is exported not
because corn is needed and gold as money is at all times an effectual
means of purchase in the world market, but because gold is in such
cases depreciated in its value as compared with other commodities
and, therefore, the currency of the country in which there has been
a failure of crops is depreciated with respect to other national
currencies. “In consequence of a bad harvest, a country having been
deprived of a part of its commodities ... the currency which was
before at its just level ... become(s) redundant,” and prices of all
commodities rise in consequence.[145] Contrary to this paradoxical
interpretation it has been proven statistically that from 1793 to
the present time, whenever England had a bad harvest the available
supply of currency not only did not become superabundant, but became
inadequate and that, therefore, more money circulated and had to
circulate on such occasions.[146]

In the same manner, Ricardo maintained, with reference to Napoleon’s
Continental System and the English Blockade Decree, that the English
exported gold instead of commodities to the Continent, because their
money was depreciated with respect to the money on the Continent, that
their commodities were, therefore, more high priced, which made it
a more profitable commercial speculation to export gold than goods.
According to him England was a market in which commodities were dear
and money was cheap, while on the Continent commodities were cheap
and money was dear. The trouble, according to an English writer, was
“the ruinously low prices of our manufactures and of our colonial
productions under the operation ... of the ‘Continental System’ during
the last six years of the war.... The prices of sugar and coffee,
for instance, on the Continent, computed in gold, were four or five
times higher than their prices in England, computed in bank-notes. I
am speaking ... of the times in which the French chemists discovered
sugar in beet-root, and a substitute for coffee in chicory; and when
the English grazier tried experiments upon fattening oxen with treacle
and molasses―of the times when we took possession of the island of
Heligoland, in order to form there a depot of goods to facilitate, if
possible, the smuggling of them into the north of Europe; and when
the lighter descriptions of British manufactures found their way into
Germany through Turkey.... Almost all the merchandise of the world
accumulated in our warehouses, where they became impounded, except when
some small quantity was released by a French License, for which the
merchants at Hamburgh and Amsterdam had, perhaps, given Napoleon such
a sum as forty or fifty thousand pounds. They must have been strange
merchants ... to have paid so large a sum for liberty to carry a cargo
of goods from a dear market to a cheap one. What was the ostensible
alternative the merchant had?... Either to buy coffee at 6d. a pound
in bank-notes, and send it to a place where it would instantly sell at
3s. or 4s. a pound in gold, or to buy gold with bank-notes at £5 an
ounce, and send it to a place where it would be received at £3 17s.
10-1/2d. an ounce.... It is too absurd, of course, to say ... that the
gold was remitted instead of the coffee, as a preferable mercantile
operation.... There was not a country in the world in which so large a
quantity of desirable goods could be obtained, in return for an ounce
of gold, as in England.... Bonaparte ... was constantly examining the
English Price Current.... So long as he saw that gold was dear and
coffee was cheap in England, he was satisfied that his ‘Continental
System’ worked well.”[147]

At the very time when Ricardo first formulated his theory of money,
and the Bullion Committee embodied it in its parliamentary report,
namely in 1810, a ruinous fall of prices of all English commodities
as compared with those of 1808 and 1809 took place, while gold rose
in value accordingly. Only agricultural products formed an exception,
because their importation from abroad met with obstacles and their
domestic supply was decimated by unfavorable crop conditions.[148]
Ricardo so utterly failed to comprehend the rôle of precious metals as
an international means of payment, that in his testimony before the
Committee of the House of Lords in 1819 he could say “that drains for
exportation would cease altogether so soon as cash payments should be
resumed, and the currency be restored to its metallic level.” He died
just in time, on the very eve of the crisis of 1825, which belied his
prophesies.

The time when Ricardo wrote was generally little adapted for the
observation of the function of precious metals as world money. Before
the introduction of the Continental System, the balance of trade
had almost always been in favor of England, and while that system
lasted, the commercial intercourse with the European continent was
too insignificant to affect the English rate of exchange. The money
transmissions were mostly of a political nature and Ricardo seems to
have utterly failed to grasp the part which subsidy payments played at
that time in English gold exports.[149]

Among the contemporaries of Ricardo who formed the school which
adopted his economic principles, JAMES MILL was the most important
one. He attempted to work out Ricardo’s theory of money on the basis
of simple metallic circulation, without the irrelevant international
complications which served Ricardo to hide the inadequacy of his
theory, and without any controversial regard for the operations of the
Bank of England. His main arguments are as follows:

“By value of money, is here to be understood the proportion in which
it exchanges for other commodities, or the quantity of it which
exchanges for a certain quantity of other things.... It is the total
quantity of the money in any country, which determines what portion of
that quantity shall exchange for a certain portion of the goods or
commodities of that country. If we suppose that all the goods of the
country are on one side, all the money on the other, and that they are
exchanged at once against one another, it is evident ... that the value
of money would depend wholly upon the quantity of it. It will appear
that the case is precisely the same in the actual state of the facts.
The whole of the goods of a country are not exchanged at once against
the whole of the money; the goods are exchanged in portions, often
in very small portions, and at different times, during the course of
the whole year. The same piece of money which is paid in one exchange
to-day, may be paid in another exchange tomorrow. Some of the pieces
will be employed in a great many exchanges, some in very few, and
some, which happen to be hoarded, in none at all. There will, amid all
these varieties, be a certain average number of exchanges, the same
which, if all the pieces had performed an equal number, would have been
performed by each; that average we may suppose to be any number we
please; say, for example, ten. If each of the pieces of the money in
the country perform ten purchases, that is exactly the same thing as if
all the pieces were multiplied by ten, and performed only one purchase
each. The value of all the goods in the country is equal to ten times
the value of all the money.... If the quantity of money instead of
performing ten exchanges in the year, were ten times as great, and
performed only one exchange in the year, it is evident that whatever
addition were made to the whole quantity, would produce a proportional
diminution of value, in each of the minor quantities taken separately.
As the quantity of goods, against which the money is all exchanged at
once, is supposed to be the same, the value of all the money is no
more, after the quantity is augmented, than before it was augmented.
If it is supposed to be augmented one-tenth, the value of every part,
that of an ounce for example, must be diminished one-tenth.... In
whatever degree, therefore, the quantity of money is increased or
diminished, other things remaining the same, in that same proportion,
the value of the whole, and of every part, is reciprocally diminished
or increased. This, it is evident, is a proposition universally true.
Whenever the value of money has either risen or fallen (the quantity
of goods against which it is exchanged and the rapidity of circulation
remaining the same), the change must be owing to a corresponding
diminution or increase of the quantity; and can be owing to nothing
else. If the quantity of goods diminish, while the quantity of money
remains the same, it is the same thing as if the quantity of money
had been increased;” and vice versa.... “Similar changes are produced
by any alteration in the rapidity of circulation.... An increase in
the number of these purchases has the same effect as an increase in
the quantity of money; a diminution the reverse.... If there is any
portion of the annual produce which is not exchanged at all, as what
is consumed by the producer; or which is not exchanged for money;
that is not taken into the account, because what is not exchanged for
money is in the same state with respect to the money, as if it did not
exist.... Whenever the coining of money ... is free, its quantity is
regulated by the value of the metal.... Gold and silver are in reality
commodities.... It is cost of production ... which determines the value
of these, as of other ordinary productions.”[150]

The whole wisdom of Mill resolves itself into a series of arbitrary and
absurd assumptions. He wishes to prove that the price of commodities or
the value of money is determined by “the total quantity of the money
in any country.” _Assuming_ that the quantity and the exchange value
of the commodities in circulation remain unchanged and that the same
be true of the rapidity of circulation and of the value of precious
metals as determined by the cost of production, and _assuming_ at
the same time that the quantity of the metallic currency increases
or decreases in proportion to the quantity of money _existing_ in a
country, it becomes really “evident” that what was to have been proven
has been assumed. Mill falls, moreover, into the same error as Hume
by assuming that use-values and not commodities with a given exchange
value are in circulation, and that vitiates his statement, even if we
grant all of his “assumptions.” The rapidity of circulation may remain
the same; this may also be true of the value of the precious metals
and of the _quantity_ of commodities in circulation; and yet a change
in the exchange value of the latter may require now a larger and now
a smaller quantity of money for their circulation. Mill sees that a
part of the money in a country is in circulation, while another is
idle. With the aid of a most absurd average calculation he _assumes_
that, although it really appears to be different, yet all the gold in
a country does circulate. Assuming that ten million silver thalers
circulate in a country twice a year, there could be twenty million such
coins in circulation, if each circulated but once. And if the entire
quantity of silver to be found in a country in any form amounts to
one hundred million thalers, it may be supposed that the entire one
hundred million can enter circulation, if each piece of money should
circulate once in five years. One could as well assume that all the
money of the world circulate in Hempstead, but that each piece of
money instead of being employed three times a year, is employed once
in 3,000,000 years. The one assumption is as relevant as the other for
the purpose of determining the relation between the sum total of prices
of commodities and the volume of currency. Mill feels that it is a
matter of decisive importance to him to bring the commodities in direct
contact not with the money in circulation, but with the entire supply
of money existing in a country. He admits that “the whole of the goods
of a country are not exchanged at once against the whole of the money,”
but that the goods are exchanged in different portions and at different
times of the year for different portions of money. To do away with this
difficulty he _assumes_ that it does not exist. Moreover, this entire
idea of direct contact of commodities and money and direct exchange is
a mere abstraction from the movement of simple purchase and sale or
the function of money as a means of purchase. Already in the movement
of money as a means of payment, commodity and money cease to appear
simultaneously.

The commercial crises of the nineteenth century, namely, the great
crises of 1825 and 1836, did not result in any new developments in
the Ricardian theory of money, but they did furnish new applications
for it. They were no longer isolated economic phenomena, such as the
depreciation of the precious metals in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries which interested Hume, or the depreciation of paper money
in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries which confronted
Ricardo; they were the great storms of the world market in which the
conflict of all the elements of the capitalist process of production
discharge themselves, and whose origin and remedy were sought in the
most superficial and abstract sphere of this process, the sphere of
money circulation. The theoretical assumption from which the school
of economic weather prophets proceeds, comes down in the end to the
illusion that Ricardo discovered the laws governing the circulation of
purely metallic currency. The only thing that remained for them to do
was to subject to the same laws the circulation of credit and bank-note
currency.

The most general and most palpable phenomenon in commercial crises is
the sudden, general decline of prices following a prolonged general
rise. The general decline of prices of commodities may be expressed as
a rise in the relative value of money with respect to all commodities,
and the general rise of prices as a decline of the relative value
of money. In either expression the phenomenon is described but not
explained. Whether I put the question thus: explain the general
periodic rise of prices followed by a general decline of the same, or
formulate the same problem by saying: explain the periodic decline and
rise of the relative value of money with respect to commodities; the
different wording leaves the problem as little changed as would its
translation from German into English. Ricardo’s theory of money was
exceedingly convenient, because it lends a tautology the semblance of
a statement of causal connection. Whence comes the periodic general
fall of prices? From the periodic rise of the relative value of
money. Whence the general periodic rise of prices? From the periodic
decline of the relative value of money. It might have been stated
with equal truth that the periodic rise and fall of prices is due
to their periodic rise and fall. The problem itself is stated under
the assumption that the intrinsic value of money, i. e., its value
as determined by the cost of production of precious metals remains
_unchanged_. If it is more than a tautology then it is based on a
misconception of the most elementary principles. If the exchange value
of A measured in terms of B, declines, we know that this may be caused
by a decline of the value of A as much as by a rise of the value of
B; the same being true of the case of a rise of the exchange value of
A measured in terms of B. The tautology once admitted as a statement
of cause, the rest follows easily. A rise of prices of commodities is
caused by a decline of the value of money and a decline of the value
of money is caused, as we know from Ricardo, by a redundant currency,
i. e., by a rise of the volume of currency over the level determined
by its own intrinsic value and the intrinsic value of the commodities.
In the same manner, the general decline of prices of commodities is
explained by the rise of the value of money above its intrinsic value
in consequence of an inadequate currency. Thus, prices rise and fall
periodically, because there is periodically too much or too little
money in circulation. Should a rise of prices happen to coincide
with a contracted currency, and a fall of prices with an expanded
one, it may be asserted in spite of those facts that in consequence
of a contraction or expansion of the volume of commodities in the
market, which can not be proven statistically, the quantity of money
in circulation has, although not absolutely, yet relatively increased
or declined. We have seen that according to Ricardo these universal
fluctuations must take place even with a purely metallic currency, but
that they balance each other through their alternations; thus, e. g.,
an inadequate currency causes a fall of prices, the fall of prices
leads to the export of commodities abroad, this export causes again an
import of gold from abroad, which, in its turn, brings about a rise
of prices; the opposite movement taking place in case of a redundant
currency, when commodities are imported and money is exported. But,
since in spite of these universal fluctuations of prices which are in
perfect accord with Ricardo’s theory of metallic currency, their acute
and violent form, their crisis-form, belongs to the period of advanced
credit, it is perfectly clear that the issue of bank-notes is not
exactly regulated by the laws of metallic currency. Metallic currency
has its remedy in the import and export of precious metals which
immediately enter circulation and thus, by their influx or efflux,
cause the prices of commodities to fall or rise. The same effect on
prices must now be exerted by banks by the artificial imitation of the
laws of metallic currency. If gold is coming in from abroad it proves
that the currency is inadequate, that the value of money is too high
and the prices of commodities too low, and, consequently, that bank
notes must be put in circulation in proportion to the newly imported
gold. On the contrary, notes have to be withdrawn from circulation in
proportion to the export of gold from the country. That is to say,
the issue of bank notes must be regulated by the import and export
of the precious metals or by the rate of exchange. Ricardo’s false
assumption that gold is only coin, and that therefore all imported gold
swells the currency, causing prices to rise, while all exported gold
reduces the currency leading to a fall of prices, this theoretical
assumption is turned into a practical experiment of putting in every
case an amount of currency in circulation equal to the amount of gold
in existence. Lord Overstone (the banker Jones Loyd), Colonel Torrens,
Norman, Clay, Arbuthnot and a host of other writers, known in England
as the adherents of the “currency principle,” not only preached this
doctrine, but with the aid of Sir Robert Peel succeeded in 1844 and
1845 in making it the basis of the present English and Scotch bank
legislation. Its ignominous failure, theoretical as well as practical,
following upon experiments on the largest national scale, can be
treated only after we take up the theory of credit.[151] So much can be
seen, however, that the theory of Ricardo which isolates money in its
fluent form of currency, ends by ascribing to the ebbs and tides in the
supply of precious metals an influence on bourgeois economy such as the
believers in the superstitions of the monetary system had never dreamt
of. Thus did Ricardo, who proclaimed paper currency as the most perfect
form of money, become the prophet of the bullionists.

After Hume’s theory or the abstract opposition to the monetary system
was thus developed to its ultimate conclusions, Steuart’s concrete
conception of money was finally restored to its rights by THOMAS
TOOKE.[152] Tooke arrives at his principles not from any theory, but
by a conscientious analysis of the history of prices of commodities
from 1793 to 1856. In the first edition of his History of Prices which
appeared in 1823, Tooke is still under the complete influence of the
Ricardian theory, and vainly tries to reconcile it with actual facts.
His pamphlet “On the Currency,” which appeared after the crisis of
1825 might even be considered as the first consistent presentation
of the views which were later given the force of law by Overstone.
Continued studies in the history of prices forced him, however, to the
conclusion that the direct connection between prices and the volume of
currency, as it is pictured by the theory, is a mere illusion; that
the expansion and contraction of currency which takes place while the
value of the precious metals remains unchanged, is always the effect
but never the cause of price fluctuations; that the circulation of
money is in any event but a secondary movement; and that money assumes
quite different forms in the actual process of production in addition
to that of a circulating medium. His detailed investigations belong
to a sphere outside of that of simple metallic circulation and can be
discussed here as little as the investigations of WILSON and FULLARTON
which belong to the same class.[153] None of these writers takes a
one-sided view of money, but treat it in its various aspects; the
treatment, however, is mechanical, without an attempt to establish an
organic connection either between these various aspects themselves,
or between them and the combined system of economic categories. They
fall, therefore, into the error of confusing _money_ as distinguished
from _medium of circulation_ with _capital_ or even with commodity,
although they are forced elsewhere to differentiate it from both.[154]
When gold, e. g., is shipped abroad, it practically means that capital
is sent abroad, but the same thing takes place when iron, cotton,
grain, or any other commodity is exported. Both are capital and are
distinguished not as capital, but as money and commodity. The function
of gold as the international medium of exchange springs, therefore,
not from its being capital, but from its specific character of money.
Similarly, when gold, or bank notes in its place, circulate in the home
trade as means of payment, they constitute capital at the same time.
But they could not be replaced by capital in the form of commodities,
as has been demonstrated very palpably by crises, for instance. That
is to say, it is the fact that gold is distinguished from commodities
in its capacity of money and not in that of capital, that makes it the
means of payment. Even when capital is exported directly as capital,
as, e. g., when it is done for the purpose of lending abroad a certain
amount on interest, it depends on circumstances, whether it will be
exported in the form of commodities or in that of gold, and if in the
latter form, it is due to the specific destination of the precious
metals as distinguished from commodities to serve as money. In general,
these writers do not consider money in its abstract form, as it is
developed within the sphere of simple circulation of commodities,
and as it spontaneously grows out of the relation of the circulating
commodities. As a result, they constantly vacillate between the
abstract forms of money which distinguish it from commodity and those
forms of it beneath which are concealed concrete relations, such as
capital, revenue, etc.[155]




Introduction

to the

Critique of Political Economy.[156]


  1. PRODUCTION IN GENERAL.

The subject of our discussion is first of all _material_ production
by individuals as determined by society, naturally constitutes the
starting point. The individual and isolated hunter or fisher who forms
the starting point with Smith and Ricardo, belongs to the insipid
illusions of the eighteenth century. They are Robinsonades which do
not by any means represent, as students of the history of civilization
imagine, a reaction against over-refinement and a return to a
misunderstood natural life. They are no more based on such a naturalism
than is Rosseau’s “contrat social,” which makes naturally independent
individuals come in contact and have mutual intercourse by contract.
They are the fiction and only the aesthetic fiction of the small and
great Robinsonades. They are, moreover, the anticipation of “bourgeois
society,” which had been in course of development since the sixteenth
century and made gigantic strides towards maturity in the eighteenth.
In this society of free competition the individual appears free from
the bonds of nature, etc., which in former epochs of history made him
a part of a definite, limited human conglomeration. To the prophets of
the eighteenth century, on whose shoulders Smith and Ricardo are still
standing, this eighteenth century individual, constituting the joint
product of the dissolution of the feudal form of society and of the new
forces of production which had developed since the sixteenth century,
appears as an ideal whose existence belongs to the past; not as a
result of history, but as its starting point.

Since that individual appeared to be in conformity with nature and
[corresponded] to their conception of human nature, [he was regarded]
not as a product of history, but of nature. This illusion has been
characteristic of every new epoch in the past. Steuart, who, as an
aristocrat, stood more firmly on historical ground, contrary to
the spirit of the eighteenth century, escaped this simplicity of
view. The further back we go into history, the more the individual
and, therefore, the producing individual seems to depend on and
constitute a part of a larger whole: at first it is, quite naturally,
the family and the clan, which is but an enlarged family; later on,
it is the community growing up in its different forms out of the
clash and the amalgamation of clans. It is but in the eighteenth
century, in “bourgeois society,” that the different forms of social
union confront the individual as a mere means to his private ends,
as an outward necessity. But the period in which this view of the
isolated individual becomes prevalent, is the very one in which the
interrelations of society (general from this point of view) have
reached the highest state of development. Man is in the most literal
sense of the word a _zoon politikon_, not only a social animal, but
an animal which can develop into an individual only in society.
Production by isolated individuals outside of society―something which
might happen as an exception to a civilized man who by accident
got into the wilderness and already dynamically possessed within
himself the forces of society―is as great an absurdity as the idea
of the development of language without individuals living together
and talking to one another. We need not dwell on this any longer.
It would not be necessary to touch upon this point at all, were not
the vagary which had its justification and sense with the people of
the eighteenth century transplanted in all earnest into the field of
political economy by Bastiat, Carey, Proudhon and others. Proudhon
and others naturally find it very pleasant, when they do not know the
historical origin of a certain economic phenomenon, to give it a quasi
historico-philosopohical explanation by going into mythology. Adam or
Prometheus hit upon the scheme cut and dried, whereupon it was adopted,
etc. Nothing is more tediously dry than the dreaming _locus communis_.

Whenever we speak, therefore, of production, we always have in mind
production at a certain stage of social development, or production
by social individuals. Hence, it might seem that in order to speak
of production at all, we must either trace the historical process of
development through its various phases, or declare at the outset that
we are dealing with a certain historical period, as, e. g., with modern
capitalistic production which, as a matter of fact, constitutes the
subject proper of this work. But all stages of production have certain
landmarks in common, common purposes. _Production in general_ is an
abstraction, but it is a rational abstraction, in so far as it singles
out and fixes the common features, thereby saving us repetition. Yet
these general or common features discovered by comparison constitute
something very complex, whose constituent elements have different
destinations. Some of these elements belong to all epochs, others are
common to a few. Some of them are common to the most modern as well
as to the most ancient epochs. No production is conceivable without
them; but while even the most completely developed languages have
laws and conditions in common with the least developed ones, what
is characteristic of their development are the points of departure
from the general and common. The conditions which generally govern
production must be differentiated in order that the essential points
of difference be not lost sight of in view of the general uniformity
which is due to the fact that the subject, mankind, and the object,
nature, remain the same. The failure to remember this one fact is the
source of all the wisdom of modern economists who are trying to prove
the eternal nature and harmony of existing social conditions. Thus they
say, e. g., that no production is possible without some instrument of
production, let that instrument be only the hand; that none is possible
without past accumulated labor, even if that labor consist of mere
skill which has been accumulated and concentrated in the hand of the
savage by repeated exercise. Capital is, among other things, also an
instrument of production, also past impersonal labor. Hence capital is
a universal, eternal natural phenomenon; which is true if we disregard
the specific properties which turn an “instrument of production” and
“stored up labor” into capital. The entire history of production
appears to a man like Carey, e. g., as a malicious perversion on the
part of governments.

If there is no production in general, there is also no general
production. Production is always some special branch of production or
an aggregate, as, e. g., agriculture, stock raising, manufactures,
etc. But political economy is not technology. The connection between
the general destinations of production at a given stage of social
development and the particular forms of production, is to be developed
elsewhere (later on).

Finally, production is not only of a special kind. It is always a
certain body politic, a social personality that is engaged on a larger
or smaller aggregate of branches of production. The connection between
the real process and its scientific presentation also falls outside
of the scope of this treatise. [We must thus distinguish between]
production in general, special branches of production and production as
a whole.

It is the fashion with economists to open their works with a general
introduction, which is entitled “production” (see, e. g., John Stuart
Mill) and deals with the general “requisites of production.”

This general introductory part treats or is supposed to treat:

1. Of the conditions without which production is impossible, i. e.,
of the most essential conditions of production. As a matter of fact,
however, it dwindles down, as we shall see, to a few very simple
definitions, which flatten out into shallow tautologies;

2. Of conditions which further production more or less, as, e. g., Adam
Smith’s [discussion of] a progressive and stagnant state of society.

In order to give scientific value to what serves with him as a mere
summary, it would be necessary to study the _degree of productivity_ by
periods in the development of individual nations; such a study falls
outside of the scope of the present subject, and in so far as it does
belong here is to be brought out in connection with the discussion
of competition, accumulation, etc. The commonly accepted view of the
matter gives a general answer to the effect that an industrial nation
is at the height of its production at the moment when it reaches its
historical climax in all respects. Or, that certain races, climates,
natural conditions, such as distance from the sea, fertility of
the soil, etc., are more favorable to production than others. That
again comes down to the tautology that the facility of creating
wealth depends on the extent to which its elements are present both
subjectively and objectively. As a matter of fact a nation is at its
industrial height so long as its main object is not gain, but the
process of gaining. In that respect the Yankees stand above the English.

But all that is not what the economists are really after in the general
introductory part. Their object is rather to represent production
in contradistinction to distribution―see Mill, e. g.―as subject to
eternal laws independent of history, and then to substitute bourgeois
relations, in an underhand way, as immutable natural laws of society
_in abstracto_. This is the more or less conscious aim of the entire
proceeding. On the contrary, when it comes to distribution, mankind
is supposed to have indulged in all sorts of arbitrary action. Quite
apart from the fact that they violently break the ties which bind
production and distribution together, so much must be clear from the
outset: that, no matter how greatly the systems of distribution may
vary at different stages of society, it should be possible here, as
in the case of production, to discover the common features and to
confound and eliminate all historical differences in formulating
_general human_ laws. E. g., the slave, the serf, the wage-worker―all
receive a quantity of food, which enables them to exist as slave,
serf, and wage-worker. The conqueror, the official, the landlord, the
monk, or the levite, who respectively live on tribute, taxes, rent,
alms, and the tithe,―all receive [a part] of the social product which
is determined by laws different from those which determine the part
received by the slave, etc. The two main points which all economists
place under this head, are: first, property; second, the protection
of the latter by the administration of justice, police, etc. The
objections to these two points can be stated very briefly.

1. All production is appropriation of nature by the individual within
and through a definite form of society. In that sense it is a tautology
to say that property (appropriation) is a condition of production. But
it becomes ridiculous, when from that one jumps at once to a definite
form of property, e. g. private property (which implies, besides, as
a prerequisite the existence of an opposite form, viz. absence of
property). History points rather to common property (e. g. among the
Hindoos, Slavs, ancient Celts, etc.) as the primitive form, which still
plays an important part at a much later period as communal property.
The question as to whether wealth grows more rapidly under this or that
form of property, is not even raised here as yet. But that there can
be no such a thing as production, nor, consequently, society, where
property does not exist in any form, is a tautology. Appropriation
which does not appropriate is a _contradictio in subjecto_.

2. Protection of property, etc. Reduced to their real meaning, these
commonplaces express more than what their preachers know, namely, that
every form of production creates its own legal relations, forms of
government, etc. The crudity and the shortcomings of the conception
lie in the tendency to see but an accidental reflective connection in
what constitutes an organic union. The bourgeois economists have a
vague notion that it is better to carry on production under the modern
police, than it was, e. g. under club-law. They forget that club law
is also law, and that the right of the stronger continues to exist in
other forms even under their “government of law.”

When the social conditions corresponding to a certain stage of
production are in a state of formation or disappearance, disturbances
of production naturally arise, although differing in extent and effect.

To sum up: all the stages of production have certain destinations in
common, which we generalize in thought; but the so-called general
conditions of all production are nothing but abstract conceptions which
do not go to make up any real stage in the history of production.


  2. THE GENERAL RELATION OF PRODUCTION TO DISTRIBUTION, EXCHANGE, AND
       CONSUMPTION.

Before going into a further analysis of production, it is necessary
to look at the various divisions which economists put side by side
with it. The most shallow conception is as follows: By production, the
members of society appropriate (produce and shape) the products of
nature to human wants; distribution determines the proportion in which
the individual participates in this production; exchange brings him the
particular products into which he wishes to turn the quantity secured
by him through distribution; finally, through consumption the products
become objects of use and enjoyment, of individual appropriation.
Production yields goods adopted to our needs; distribution distributes
them according to social laws; exchange distributes further what has
already been distributed, according to individual wants; finally, in
consumption the product drops out of the social movement, becoming the
direct object of the individual want which it serves and satisfies in
use. Production thus appears as the starting point; consumption as the
final end; and distribution and exchange as the middle; the latter
has a double aspect, distribution being defined as a process carried
on by society, while exchange, as one proceeding from the individual.
In production the person is embodied in things, in [consumption[157]]
things are embodied in persons; in distribution, society assumes
the part of go-between of production and consumption in the form of
generally prevailing rules; in exchange this is accomplished by the
accidental make-up of the individual.

Distribution determines what proportion (quantity) of the products the
individual is to receive; exchange determines the products in which the
individual desires to receive his share allotted to him by distribution.

Production, distribution, exchange, and consumption thus form a
perfect connection, production standing for the general, distribution
and exchange for the special, and consumption for the individual, in
which all are joined together. To be sure this is a connection, but
it does not go very deep. Production is determined [according to the
economists] by universal natural laws, while distribution depends
on social chance: distribution can, therefore, have a more or less
stimulating effect on production: exchange lies between the two as a
formal (?) social movement, and the final act of consumption which is
considered not only as a final purpose, but also as a final aim, falls,
properly, outside of the scope of economics, except in so far as it
reacts on the starting point and causes the entire process to begin all
over again.

The opponents of the economists―whether economists themselves or
not―who reproach them with tearing apart, like barbarians, what is an
organic whole, either stand on common ground with them or are _below_
them. Nothing is more common than the charge that the economists
have been considering production as an end in itself, too much to
the exclusion of everything else. The same has been said with regard
to distribution. This accusation is itself based on the economic
conception that distribution exists side by side with production as
a self-contained, independent sphere. Or [they are accused] that the
various factors are not treated by them in their connection as a
whole. As though it were the text books that impress this separation
upon life and not life upon the text books; and the subject at issue
were a dialectic balancing of conceptions and not an analysis of real
conditions.

_a. Production is at the same time also consumption._ Twofold
consumption, subjective and objective. The individual who develops his
faculties in production, is also expending them, consuming them in the
act of production, just as procreation is in its way a consumption
of vital powers. In the second place, production is consumption of
means of production which are used and used up and partly (as e. g. in
burning) reduced to their natural elements. The same is true of the
consumption of raw materials which do not remain in their natural form
and state, being greatly absorbed in the process. The act of production
is, therefore, in all its aspects an act of consumption as well. But
this is admitted by economists. Production as directly identical with
consumption, consumption as directly coincident with production,
they call productive consumption. This identity of production
and consumption finds its expression in Spinoza’s proposition,
_Determinatio est negatio_. But this definition of productive
consumption is resorted to just for the purpose of distinguishing
between consumption as identical with production and consumption
proper, which is defined as its destructive counterpart. Let us then
consider consumption proper.

Consumption is directly also production, just as in nature the
consumption of the elements and of chemical matter constitutes
production of plants. It is clear, that in nutrition, e. g., which
is but one form of consumption, man produces his own body; but it is
equally true of every kind of consumption, which goes to produce the
human being in one way or another. [It is] consumptive production.
But, say the economists, this production which is identical with
consumption, is a second production resulting from the destruction
of the product of the first. In the first, the producer transforms
himself into things; in the second, things are transformed into human
beings. Consequently, this consumptive production―although constituting
a direct unity of production and consumption―differs essentially from
production proper. The direct unity in which production coincides with
consumption and consumption with production, does not interfere with
their direct duality.

Production is thus at the same time consumption, and consumption is at
the same time production. Each is directly its own counterpart. But
at the same time an intermediary movement goes on between the two.
Production furthers consumption by creating material for the latter
which otherwise would lack its object. But consumption in its turn
furthers production, by providing for the products the individual
for whom they are products. The product receives its last finishing
touches in consumption. A railroad on which no one rides, which is,
consequently not used up, not consumed, is but a potential railroad,
and not a real one. Without production, no consumption; but, on the
other hand, without consumption, no production; since production would
then be without a purpose. Consumption produces production in two ways.

In the first place, in that the product first becomes a real product
in consumption; e. g., a garment becomes a real garment only through
the act of being worn; a dwelling which is not inhabited, is really no
dwelling; consequently, a product as distinguished from a mere natural
object, proves to be such, first _becomes_ a product in consumption.
Consumption gives the product the finishing touch by annihilating it,
since a product is the [result] of production not only as the material
embodiment of activity, but also as a mere object for the active
subject.

In the second place, consumption produces production by creating the
necessity for new production, i. e. by providing the ideal, inward,
impelling cause which constitutes the prerequisite of production.
Consumption furnishes the impulse for production as well as its object,
which plays in production the part of its guiding aim. It is clear
that while production furnishes the material object of consumption,
consumption provides the ideal object of production, as its image,
its want, its impulse and its purpose. It furnishes the object of
production in its subjective form. No wants, no production. But
consumption reproduces the want.

In its turn, production:

First, furnishes consumption[158] with its material, its object.
Consumption without an object is no consumption, hence production works
in this direction by producing consumption.

Second. But it is not only the object that production provides for
consumption. It gives consumption its definite outline, its character,
its finish. Just as consumption gives the product its finishing touch
as a product, production puts the finishing touch on consumption. For
the object is not simply an object in general, but a definite object,
which is consumed in a certain definite manner prescribed in its turn
by production. Hunger is hunger; but the hunger that is satisfied with
cooked meat eaten with fork and knife is a different kind of hunger
from the one that devours raw meat with the aid of hands, nails, and
teeth. Not only the object of consumption, but also the manner of
consumption is produced by production; that is to say, consumption is
created by production not only objectively, but also subjectively.
Production thus creates the consumers.

Third. Production not only supplies the want with material, but
supplies the material with a want. When consumption emerges from its
first stage of natural crudeness and directness―and its continuation
in that state would in itself be the result of a production still
remaining in a state of natural crudeness―it is itself furthered by its
object as a moving spring. The want of it which consumption experiences
is created by its appreciation of the product. The object of art, as
well as any other product, creates an artistic and beauty-enjoying
public. Production thus produces not only an object for the individual,
but also an individual for the object.

Production thus produces consumption: first, by furnishing the latter
with material; second, by determining the manner of consumption;
third, by creating in consumers a want for its products as objects of
consumption. It thus produces the object, the manner, and the moving
spring of consumption. In the same manner, consumption [creates] the
_disposition_ of the producer by setting (?) him up as an aim and by
stimulating wants. The identity of consumption and production thus
appears to be a three fold one.

First, direct identity: production is consumption; consumption is
production. Consumptive production. Productive consumption. Economists
call both productive consumption, but make one distinction by calling
the former reproduction, and the latter productive consumption. All
inquiries into the former deal with productive and unproductive labor;
those into the latter treat of productive and unproductive consumption.

Second. Each appears as the means of the other and as being brought
about by the other, which is expressed as their mutual interdependence;
a relation, by virtue of which they appear as mutually connected and
indispensable, yet remaining outside of each other.

Production creates the material as the outward object of consumption;
consumption creates the want as the inward object, the purpose of
production. Without production, no consumption; without consumption, no
production; this maxim figures (?) in political economy in many forms.

Third. Production is not only directly consumption and consumption
directly production; nor is production merely a means of consumption
and consumption the purpose of production. In other words, not only
does each furnish the other with its object; production, the material
object of consumption; consumption, the ideal object of production. On
the contrary, either one is not only directly the other, not (?) only
a means of furthering the other, but while it is taking place, creates
the other as such for itself (?). Consumption completes the act of
production by giving the finishing touch to the product as such, by
destroying the latter, by breaking up its independent material form; by
bringing to a state of readiness, through the necessity of repetition,
the disposition to produce developed in the first act of production;
that is to say, it is not only the concluding act through which the
product becomes a product, but also [the one] through which the
producer becomes a producer. On the other hand, production produces
consumption, by determining the manner of consumption, and further, by
creating the incentive for consumption, the very ability to consume, in
the form of want. This latter identity mentioned under point 3, is much
discussed in political economy in connection with the treatment of the
relations of demand and supply, of objects and wants, of natural wants
and those created by society.

Hence, it is the simplest matter with a Hegelian to treat production
and consumption as identical. And this has been done not only by
socialist writers of fiction but even by economists, e. g. Say; the
latter maintained that if we consider a nation as a whole, or mankind
_in abstracto_―her production is at the same time her consumption.
Storch pointed out Say’s error by calling attention to the fact that
a nation does not entirely consume her product, but also creates
means of production, fixed capital, etc. To consider society as a
single individual is moreover a false mode of speculative reasoning.
With an individual, production and consumption appear as different
aspects of one act. The important point to be emphasized here is that
if production and consumption be considered as activities of one
individual or of separate individuals, they appear at any rate as
aspects of one process in which production forms the actual starting
point and is, therefore, the predominating factor. Consumption,
as a natural necessity, as a want, constitutes an internal factor
of productive activity, but the latter is the starting point of
realization and, therefore, its predominating factor, the act into
which the entire process resolves itself in the end. The individual
produces a certain article and turns again into himself by consuming
it; but he returns as a productive and a self-reproducing individual.
Consumption thus appears as a factor of production.

In society, however, the relation of the producer to his product,
as soon as it is completed, is an outward one, and the return of
the product to the individual depends on his relations to other
individuals. He does not take immediate possession of it. Nor does the
direct appropriation of the product constitute his purpose, when he
produces in society. Between the producer and the product distribution
steps in, which determines by social laws his share in the world of
products; that is to say, distribution steps in between production and
consumption.

Does distribution form an independent sphere standing side by side with
and outside of production?

_b. Production and Distribution._ In perusing the common treatises on
economics one can not help being struck with the fact that everything
is treated there twice; e. g., under distribution, there figure rent,
wages, interest, and profit; while under production we find land,
labor, and capital as agents of production. As regards capital, it
is at once clear that it is counted twice: first, as an agent of
production; second, as a source of income; as determining factors and
definite forms of distribution, interest and profit figure as such also
in production, since they are forms, in which capital increases and
grows, and are consequently factors of its own production. Interest and
profit, as forms of distribution, imply the existence of capital as
an agent of production. They are forms of distribution which have for
their prerequisite capital as an agent of production. They are also
forms of reproduction of capital.

In the same manner, wages is wage-labor when considered under another
head; the definite character which labor has in one case as an agent
of production, appears in the other as a form of distribution. If
labor were not fixed as wage-labor, its manner of participation in
distribution[159] would not appear as wages, as is the case e. g. under
slavery. Finally, rent―to take at once the most developed form of
distribution―by means of which landed property receives its share of
the products, implies the existence of large landed property (properly
speaking, agriculture on a large scale) as an agent of production,
and not simply land, no more than wages represents simply labor.
The relations and methods of distribution appear, therefore, merely
as the reverse sides of the agents of production. An individual who
participates in production as a wage laborer, receives his share of the
products, i. e. of the results of production, in the form of wages. The
subdivisions and organization of distribution are determined by the
subdivisions and organization of production. Distribution is itself a
product of production, not only in so far as the material goods are
concerned, since only the results of production can be distributed; but
also as regards its form, since the definite manner of participation
in production determines the particular form of distribution, the form
under which participation in distribution takes place. It is quite an
illusion to place land under production, rent under distribution, etc.

Economists, like Ricardo, who are accused above all of having paid
exclusive attention to production, define distribution, therefore,
as the exclusive subject of political economy, because they
instinctively[160] regard the forms of distribution as the clearest
forms in which the agents of production find expression in a given
society.

To the single individual distribution naturally appears as a law
established by society determining his position in the sphere of
production, within which he produces, and thus antedating production.
At the outset the individual has no capital, no landed property.
From his birth he is assigned to wage-labor by the social process of
distribution. But this very condition of being assigned to wage-labor
is the result of the existence of capital and landed property as
independent agents of production.

From the point of view of society as a whole, distribution seems to
antedate and to determine production in another way as well, as a
pre-economic fact, so to say. A conquering people divides the land
among the conquerors establishing thereby a certain division and
form of landed property and determining the character of production;
or, it turns the conquered people into slaves and thus makes slave
labor the basis of production. Or, a nation, by revolution, breaks up
large estates into small parcels of land and by this new distribution
imparts to production a new character. Or, legislation perpetuates
land ownership in large families or distributes labor as an hereditary
privilege and thus fixes it in castes.

In all of these cases, and they are all historic, it is not
distribution that seems to be organized and determined by production,
but on the contrary, production by distribution.

In the most shallow conception of distribution, the latter appears as
a distribution of products and to that extent as further removed from
and quasi-independent of production. But before distribution means
distribution of products, it is first, a distribution of the means of
production, and second, what is practically another wording of the
same fact, it is a distribution of the members of society among the
various kinds of production (the subjection of individuals to certain
conditions of production). The distribution of products is manifestly
a result of this distribution, which is bound up with the process of
production and determines the very organization of the latter. To
treat of production apart from the distribution which is comprised in
it, is plainly an idle abstraction. Conversely, we know the character
of the distribution of products the moment we are given the nature of
that other distribution which forms originally a factor of production.
Ricardo, who was concerned with the analysis of production as it is
organized in modern society and who was the economist of production
_par excellence_, for that very reason declares _not_ production
but distribution as the subject proper of modern economics. We have
here another evidence of the insipidity of the economists who treat
production as an eternal truth, and banish history to the domain of
distribution.

What relation to production this distribution, which has a determining
influence on production itself, assumes, is plainly a question which
falls within the province of production. Should it be maintained
that at least to the extent that production depends on a certain
distribution of the instruments of production, distribution in that
sense precedes production and constitutes its prerequisite; it may
be replied that production has in fact its prerequisite conditions,
which form factors of it. These may appear at first to have a natural
origin. By the very process of production they are changed from natural
to historical, and if they appear during one period as a natural
prerequisite of production, they formed at other periods its historical
result. Within the sphere of production itself they are undergoing a
constant change. E. g., the application of machinery produces a change
in the distribution of the instruments of production as well as in that
of products, and modern land ownership on a large scale is as much the
result of modern trade and modern industry, as that of the application
of the latter to agriculture.

All of these questions resolve themselves in the last instance to this:
How do general historical conditions affect production and what part
does it play at all in the course of history? It is evident that this
question can be taken up only in connection with the discussion and
analysis of production.

Yet in the trivial form in which these questions are raised above,
they can be answered just as briefly. In the case of all conquests
three ways lie open. The conquering people may impose its own methods
of production upon the conquered (e. g. the English in Ireland in the
nineteenth century, partly also in India); or, it may allow everything
to remain as it was contenting itself with tribute (e. g. the Turks
and the Romans); or, the two systems by mutually modifying each other
may result in something new, a synthesis (which partly resulted
from the Germanic conquests). In all of these conquests the method
of production, be it of the conquerors, the conquered, or the one
resulting from a combination of both, determines the nature of the new
distribution which comes into play. Although the latter appears now
as the prerequisite condition of the new period of production, it is
in itself but a product of production, not of production belonging to
history in general, but of production relating to a definite historical
period. The Mongols with their devastations in Russia e. g. acted
in accordance with their system of production, for which sufficient
pastures on large uninhabited stretches of country are the main
prerequisite. The Germanic barbarians, with whom agriculture carried
on with the aid of serfs was the traditional system of production and
who were accustomed to lonely life in the country, could introduce
the same conditions in the Roman provinces so much easier since the
concentration of landed property which had taken place there, died away
completely with the older systems of agriculture. There is a prevalent
tradition that in certain periods robbery constituted the only source
of living. But in order to be able to plunder, there must be something
to plunder, i. e. there must be production.[161] And even the method
of plunder is determined by the method of production. A stockjobbing
nation[162] e. g. can not be robbed in the same manner as a nation of
shepherds.

In the case of the slave the instrument of production is robbed
directly. But then the production of the country in whose interest he
is robbed, must be so organized as to admit of slave labor, or (as in
South America, etc.) a system of production must be introduced adapted
to slavery.

Laws may perpetuate an instrument of production, e. g. land, in certain
families. These laws assume an economic importance if large landed
property is in harmony with the system of production prevailing in
society, as is the case e. g. in England. In France agriculture had
been carried on on a small scale in spite of the large estates, and
the latter were, therefore, broken up by the Revolution. But how about
the legislative attempt to perpetuate the minute subdivision of the
land? In spite of these laws land ownership is concentrating again. The
effect of legislation on the maintenance of a system of distribution
and its resultant influence on production are to be determined
elsewhere.

_c. Exchange and Circulation._ Circulation is but a certain aspect
of exchange, or it may be defined as exchange considered as a whole.
Since _exchange_ is an intermediary factor between production and its
dependent, distribution, on the one hand, and consumption, on the
other; and since the latter appears but as a constituent of production,
exchange is manifestly also a constituent part of production.

In the first place, it is clear that the exchange of activities and
abilities which takes place in the sphere of production falls directly
within the latter and constitutes one of its essential elements. In
the second place, the same is true of the exchange of products, in
so far as it is a means of completing a certain product, designed
for immediate consumption. To that extent exchange constitutes an
act included in production. Thirdly, the so-called exchange between
dealers and dealers[163] is by virtue of its organization determined by
production, and is itself a species of productive activity. Exchange
appears to be independent of and indifferent to production only in the
last stage when products are exchanged directly for consumption. But
in the first place, there is no exchange without a division of labor,
whether natural or as a result of historical development; secondly,
private exchange implies the existence of private production; thirdly,
the intensity of exchange, as well as its extent and character are
determined by the degree of development and organization of production,
as e. g. exchange between city and country, exchange in the country, in
the city, etc. Exchange thus appears in all its aspects to be directly
included in or determined by production.

The result we arrive at is not that production, distribution, exchange,
and consumption are identical, but that they are all members of one
entity, different sides of one unit. Production predominates not only
over production itself in the opposite sense of that term, but over
the other elements as well. With it the process constantly starts over
again. That exchange and consumption can not be the predominating
elements is self evident. The same is true of distribution in the
narrow sense of distribution of products; as for distribution in the
sense of distribution of the agents of production, it is itself but a
factor of production. A definite [form of] production thus determines
the [forms of] consumption, distribution, exchange, and _also the
mutual relations between these various elements_. Of course, production
_in its one-sided form_ is in its turn influenced by other elements; e.
g. with the expansion of the market, i. e. of the sphere of exchange,
production grows in volume and is subdivided to a greater extent.

With a change in distribution, production undergoes a change; as
e. g. in the case of concentration of capital, of a change in the
distribution of population in city and country, etc. Finally, the
demands of consumption also influence production. A mutual interaction
takes place between the various elements. Such is the case with every
organic body.


  3. THE METHOD OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.

When we consider a given country from a politico-economic standpoint,
we begin with its population, then analyze the latter according to
its subdivision into classes, location in city, country, or by the
sea, occupation in different branches of production; then we study
its exports and imports, annual production and consumption, prices of
commodities, etc. It seems to be the correct procedure to commence
with the real and concrete aspect of conditions as they are; in the
case of political economy, to commence with population which is the
basis and the author of the entire productive activity of society.
Yet, on closer consideration it proves to be wrong. Population is an
abstraction, if we leave out e. g. the classes of which it consists.
These classes, again, are but an empty word, unless we know what are
the elements on which they are based, such as wage-labor, capital,
etc. Those imply, in their turn, exchange, division of labor, prices,
etc. Capital, e. g. does not mean anything without wage-labor, value,
money, price, etc. If we start out, therefore, with population, we do
so with a chaotic conception of the whole, and by closer analysis we
will gradually arrive at simpler ideas; thus we shall proceed from the
imaginary concrete to loss and less complex abstractions, until we
get at the simplest conception. This once attained, we might start
on our return journey until we would finally come back to population,
but this time not as a chaotic notion of an integral whole, but as a
rich aggregate of many conceptions and relations. The former method
is the one which political economy had adopted in the past at its
inception. The economists of the seventeenth century, e. g., always
started out with the living aggregate: population, nation, state,
several states, etc., but in the end they invariably arrived, by means
of analysis, at certain leading, abstract general principles, such
as division of labor, money, value, etc. As soon as these separate
elements had been more or less established by abstract reasoning,
there arose the systems of political economy which start from simple
conceptions, such as labor, division of labor, demand, exchange value,
and conclude with state, international exchange and world market. The
latter is manifestly the scientifically correct method. The concrete is
concrete, because it is a combination of many objects with different
destinations, i. e. a unity of diverse elements. In our thought, it
therefore appears as a process of synthesis, as a result, and not as a
starting point, although it is the real starting point and, therefore,
also the starting point of observation and conception. By the former
method the complete conception passes into an abstract definition; by
the latter, the abstract definitions lead to the reproduction of the
concrete subject in the course of reasoning. Hegel fell into the error,
therefore, of considering the real as the result of self-coordinating,
self-absorbed, and spontaneously operating thought, while the method of
advancing from the abstract to the concrete is but a way of thinking
by which the concrete is grasped and is reproduced in our mind as
a concrete. It is by no means, however, the process which itself
generates the concrete. The simplest economic category, say, exchange
value, implies the existence of population, population that is engaged
in production under certain conditions; it also implies the existence
of certain types of family, clan, or state, etc. It can have no other
existence except as an abstract one-sided relation of an already given
concrete and living aggregate.

As a category, however, exchange value leads an antediluvian existence.
And since our philosophic consciousness is so arranged that only the
image of the man that it conceives appears to it as the real man
and the world as it conceives it, as the real world; it mistakes
the movement of categories for the real act of production (which
unfortunately (?) receives only its impetus from outside) whose
result is the world; that is true―here we have, however, again a
tautology―in so far as the concrete aggregate is a thought aggregate,
in so far as the concrete subject of our thought is in fact a product
of thought, of comprehension; not, however, in the sense of a product
of a self-emanating conception which works outside of and stands
above observation and imagination, but of a mental consummation of
observation and imagination. The whole, as it appears in our heads as
a thought-aggregate, is the product of a thinking mind which grasps
the world in the only way open to it, a way which differs from the one
employed by the artistic, religious, or practical mind. The concrete
subject continues to lead an independent existence after it has been
grasped, as it did before, outside of the head, so long as the head
contemplates it only speculatively, theoretically. So that in the
employment of the theoretical method [in political economy], the
subject, society, must constantly be kept in mind as the premise from
which we start.

But have these simple categories no independent historical or natural
existence antedating the more concrete ones? _Ça depend._ For instance,
in his Philosophy of Law Hegel rightly starts out with possession,
as the simplest legal relation of individuals. But there is no such
thing as possession before the family or the relations of lord and
serf, which are a great deal more concrete relations, have come into
existence. On the other hand, one would be right in saying that there
are families and clans which only _possess_, but do not _own_ things.
The simpler category thus appears as a relation of simple family and
clan communities with respect to property. In earlier society the
category appears as a simple relation of a developed organism, but the
concrete substratum from which springs the relation of possession, is
always implied. One can imagine an isolated savage in possession of
things. But in that case possession is no legal relation. It is not
true that the family came as the result of the historical evolution of
possession. On the contrary, the latter always implies the existence
of this “more concrete category of law.” Yet so much may be said, that
the simple categories are the expression of relations in which the
less developed concrete entity may have been realized without entering
into the manifold relations and bearings which are mentally expressed
in the concrete category; but when the concrete entity attains fuller
development it will retain the same category as a subordinate relation.

Money may exist and actually had existed in history before capital, or
banks, or wage-labor came into existence. With that in mind, it may be
said that the more simple category can serve as an expression of the
predominant relations of an undeveloped whole or of the subordinate
relations of a more developed whole, [relations] which had historically
existed before the whole developed in the direction expressed in the
more concrete category. In so far, the laws of abstract reasoning which
ascends from the most simple to the complex, correspond to the actual
process of history.

On the other hand, it may be said that there are highly developed but
historically unripe forms of society in which the highest economic
forms are to be found, such as co-operation, advanced division of
labor, etc., and yet there is no money in existence, e. g. Peru.

In Slavic communities also, money, as well as exchange to which it
owes its existence, does not appear at all or very little within the
separate communities, but it appears on their boundaries in their
inter-communal traffic; in general, it is erroneous to consider
exchange as a constituent element originating within the community.
It appears at first more in the mutual relations between different
communities, than in those between the members of the same community.
Furthermore, although money begins to play its part everywhere at an
early stage, it plays in antiquity the part of a predominant element
only in one-sidedly developed nations, viz. trading nations, and even
in most cultured antiquity, in Greece and Rome, it attains its full
development, which constitutes the prerequisite of modern bourgeois
society, only in the period of their decay. Thus, this quite simple
category attained its culmination in the past only at the most advanced
stages of society. Even then it did not pervade (?) all economic
relations; in Rome e. g. at the time of its highest development taxes
and payments in kind remained the basis. As a matter of fact, the money
system was fully developed there only so far as the army was concerned;
it never came to dominate the entire system of labor.

Thus, although the simple category may have existed historically before
the more concrete one, it can attain its complete internal and external
development only in complex (?) forms of society, while the more
concrete category has reached its full development in a less advanced
form of society.

Labor is quite a simple category. The idea of labor in that sense, as
labor in general, is also very old. Yet, “labor” thus simply defined
by political economy is as much a modern category, as the conditions
which have given rise to this simple abstraction. The monetary system,
e. g. defines wealth quite objectively, as a thing (?)[164] in money.
Compared with this point of view, it was a great step forward, when
the industrial or commercial system came to see the source of wealth
not in the object but in the activity of persons, viz. in commercial
and industrial labor. But even the latter was thus considered only
in the limited sense of a money producing activity. The physiocratic
system [marks still further progress] in that it considers a certain
form of labor, viz. agriculture, as the source of wealth, and wealth
itself not in the disguise of money, but as a product in general, as
the general result of labor. But corresponding to the limitations of
the activity, this product is still only a natural product. Agriculture
is productive, land is the source of production _par excellence_. It
was a tremendous advance on the part of Adam Smith to throw aside all
limitations which mark wealth-producing activity and [to define it] as
labor in general, neither industrial, nor commercial, nor agricultural,
or one as much as the other. Along with the universal character of
wealth-creating activity we have now the universal character of the
object defined as wealth, viz. product in general, or labor in general,
but as past incorporated labor. How difficult and great was the
transition, is evident from the way Adam Smith himself falls back from
time to time into the physiocratic system. Now, it might seem as though
this amounted simply to finding an abstract expression for the simplest
relation into which men have been mutually entering as producers from
times of yore, no matter under what form of society. In one sense this
is true. In another it is not.

The indifference as to the particular kind of labor implies the
existence of a highly developed aggregate of different species of
concrete labor, none of which is any longer the predominant one. So
do the most general abstractions commonly arise only where there is
the highest concrete development, where one feature appears to be
jointly possessed by many, and to be common to all. Then it can not
be thought of any longer in one particular form. On the other hand,
this abstraction of labor is but the result of a concrete aggregate of
different kinds of labor. The indifference to the particular kind of
labor corresponds to a form of society in which individuals pass with
ease from one kind of work to another, which makes it immaterial to
them what particular kind of work may fall to their share. Labor has
become here, not only categorically but really, a means of creating
wealth in general and is no longer grown together with the individual
into one particular destination. This state of affairs has found its
highest development in the most modern of bourgeois societies, the
United States. It is only here that the abstraction of the category
“labor,” “labor in general,” labor _sans phrase_, the starting point
of modern political economy, becomes realized in practice. Thus,
the simplest abstraction which modern political economy sets up as
its starting point, and which expresses a relation dating back to
antiquity and prevalent under all forms of society, appears in this
abstraction truly realized only as a category of the most modern
society. It might be said that what appears in the United States as an
historical product,―viz. the indifference as to the particular kind of
labor―appears among the Russians e. g. as a natural disposition. But it
makes all the difference in the world whether barbarians have a natural
predisposition which makes them applicable alike to everything, or
whether civilized people apply themselves to everything. And, besides,
this indifference of the Russians as to the kind of work they do,
corresponds to their traditional practice of remaining in the rut of a
quite definite occupation until they are thrown out of it by external
influences.

This example of labor strikingly shows how even the most abstract
categories, in spite of their applicability to all epochs―just because
of their abstract character―are by the very definiteness of the
abstraction a product of historical conditions as well, and are fully
applicable only to and under those conditions.

The bourgeois society is the most highly developed and most highly
differentiated historical organization of production. The categories
which serve as the expression of its conditions and the comprehension
of its own organization enable it at the same time to gain an insight
into the organization and the conditions of production which had
prevailed under all the past forms of society, on the ruins and
constituent elements of which it has arisen, and of which it still
drags along some unsurmounted remnants, while what had formerly been
mere intimation has now developed to complete significance. The anatomy
of the human being is the key to the anatomy of the ape. But the
intimations of a higher animal in lower ones can be understood only if
the animal of the higher order is already known. The bourgeois economy
furnishes a key to ancient economy, etc. This is, however, by no means
true of the method of those economists who blot out all historical
differences and see the bourgeois form in all forms of society. One can
understand the nature of tribute, tithes, etc., after one has learned
the nature of rent. But they must not be considered identical.

Since, furthermore, bourgeois society is but a form resulting from
the development of antagonistic elements, some relations belonging
to earlier forms of society are frequently to be found in it but in
a crippled state or as a travesty of their former self, as e. g.
communal property. While it may be said, therefore, that the categories
of bourgeois economy contain what is true of all other forms of
society, the statement is to be taken _cum grano salis_. They may
contain these in a developed, or crippled, or caricatured form, but
always essentially different. The so-called historical development
amounts in the last analysis to this, that the last form considers its
predecessors as stages leading up to itself and perceives them always
one-sidedly, since it is very seldom and only under certain conditions
that it is capable of self-criticism; of course, we do not speak here
of such historical periods which appear to their own contemporaries as
periods of decay. The Christian religion became capable to assist us
to an objective view of past mythologies as soon as it was ready for
self-criticism to a certain extent, _dynamei_ so-to-say. In the same
way bourgeois political economy first came to understand the feudal,
the ancient, and the oriental societies as soon as the self-criticism
of the bourgeois society had commenced. So far as bourgeois political
economy has not gone into the mythology of purely (?) identifying the
bourgeois system with the past, its criticism of the feudal system
against which it still had to wage war resembled Christian criticism
of the heathen religions or Protestant criticism of Catholicism.

In the study of economic categories, as in the case of every historical
and social science, it must be borne in mind that as in reality so
in our mind the subject, in this case modern bourgeois society, is
given and that the categories are therefore but forms of expression,
manifestations of existence, and frequently but one-sided aspects of
this subject, this definite society; and that, therefore, the origin of
[political economy] _as a science_ does not by any means date from the
time to which it is referred _as such_. This is to be firmly held in
mind because it has an immediate and important bearing on the matter of
the subdivisions of the science.

For instance, nothing seems more natural than to start with rent, with
landed property, since it is bound up with land, the source of all
production and all existence, and with the first form of production in
all more or less settled communities, viz. agriculture. But nothing
would be more erroneous. Under all forms of society there is a certain
industry which predominates over all the rest and whose condition
therefore determines the rank and influence of all the rest.

It is the universal light with which all the other colors are tinged
and are modified through its peculiarity. It is a special ether which
determines the specific gravity of everything that appears in it.

Let us take for example pastoral nations (mere hunting and fishing
tribes are not as yet at the point from which real development
commences). They engage in a certain form of agriculture, sporadically.
The nature of land-ownership is determined thereby. It is held in
common and retains this form more or less according to the extent to
which these nations hold on to traditions; such e. g. is land-ownership
among the Slavs. Among nations whose agriculture is carried on by a
settled population―the settled state constituting a great advance―where
agriculture is the predominant industry, such as in ancient and feudal
societies, even the manufacturing industry and its organization, as
well as the forms of property which pertain to it, have more or less
the characteristic features of the prevailing system of land ownership;
[society] is then either entirely dependent upon agriculture, as in the
case of ancient Rome, or, as in the middle ages, it imitates in its
city relations the forms of organization prevailing in the country.
Even capital, with the exception of pure money capital, has, in the
form of the traditional working tool, the characteristics of land
ownership in the Middle Ages.

The reverse is true of bourgeois society. Agriculture comes to be more
and more merely a branch of industry and is completely dominated by
capital. The same is true of rent. In all the forms of society in which
land ownership is the prevalent form, the influence of the natural
element is the predominant one. In those where capital predominates the
prevailing element is the one historically created by society. Rent
can not be understood without capital, nor can capital, without rent.
Capital is the all dominating economic power of bourgeois society. It
must form the starting point as well as the end and be developed before
land-ownership is. After each has been considered separately, their
mutual relation must be analyzed.

It would thus be impractical and wrong to arrange the economic
categories in the order in which they were the determining factors in
the course of history. Their order of sequence is rather determined
by the relation which they bear to one another in modern bourgeois
society, and which is the exact opposite of what seems to be their
natural order or the order of their historical development. What we are
interested in is not the place which economic relations occupy in the
historical succession of different forms of society. Still less are we
interested in the order of their succession “in idea” (_Proudhon_),
which is but a hazy (?) conception of the course of history. We are
interested in their organic connection within modern bourgeois society.

The sharp line of demarkation (abstract precision) which so clearly
distinguished the trading nations of antiquity, such as the
Phenicians and the Carthagenians, was due to that very predominance
of agriculture. Capital as trading or money capital appears in that
abstraction, where capital does not constitute as yet the predominating
element of society. The Lombardians and the Jews occupied the same
position among the agricultural nations of the middle ages.

As a further illustration of the fact that the same category plays
different parts at different stages of society, we may mention the
following: one of the latest forms of bourgeois society, viz. stock
companies, appear also at its beginning in the form of the great
chartered monopolistic trading companies. The conception of national
wealth which is imperceptibly formed in the minds of the economists of
the seventeenth century, and which partly continues to be entertained
by those of the eighteenth century, is that wealth is produced solely
for the state, but that the power of the latter is proportional to that
wealth. It was as yet an unconsciously hypocritical way in which wealth
announced itself and its own production as the aim of modern states
considering the latter merely as a means to the production of wealth.

The order of treatment must manifestly be as follows: first, the
general abstract definitions which are more or less applicable to
all forms of society, but in the sense indicated above. Second, the
categories which go to make up the inner organization of bourgeois
society and constitute the foundations of the principal classes;
capital, wage-labor, landed property; their mutual relations; city and
country; the three great social classes, the exchange between them;
circulation, credit (private). Third, the organization of bourgeois
society in the form of a state, considered in relation to itself; the
“unproductive” classes; taxes; public debts; public credit; population;
colonies; emigration. Fourth, the international organization of
production; international division of labor; international exchange;
import and export; rate of exchange. Fifth, the world market and
crises.

The order of our investigation of the different sections of the
proletariat follows naturally from the foregoing history of its rise.  The
first proletarians were connected with manufacture, were engendered by
it, and accordingly, those employed in manufacture, in the working up of
raw materials, will first claim our attention.  The production of raw
materials and of fuel for manufacture attained importance only in
consequence of the industrial change, and engendered a new proletariat,
the coal and metal miners.  Then, in the third place, manufacture
influenced agriculture, and in the fourth, the condition of Ireland; and
the fractions of the proletariat belonging to each, will find their place
accordingly.  We shall find, too, that with the possible exception of the
Irish, the degree of intelligence of the various workers is in direct
proportion to their relation to manufacture; and that the factory hands
are most enlightened as to their own interests, the miners somewhat less
so, the agricultural labourers scarcely at all.  We shall find the same
order again among the industrial workers, and shall see how the factory
hands, eldest children of the industrial revolution, have from the
beginning to the present day formed the nucleus of the Labour Movement,
and how the others have joined this movement just in proportion as their
handicraft has been invaded by the progress of machinery.  We shall thus
learn from the example which England offers, from the equal pace which
the Labour Movement has kept with the movement of industrial development,
the historical significance of manufacture.

Since, however, at the present moment, pretty much the whole industrial
proletariat is involved in the movement, and the condition of the
separate sections has much in common, because they all are industrial, we
shall have first to examine the condition of the industrial proletariat
as a whole, in order later to notice more particularly each separate
division with its own peculiarities.

It has been already suggested that manufacture centralises property in
the hands of the few.  It requires large capital with which to erect the
colossal establishments that ruin the petty trading bourgeoisie and with
which to press into its service the forces of Nature, so driving the hand
labour of the independent workman out of the market.  The division of
labour, the application of water and especially steam, and the
application of machinery, are the three great levers with which
manufacture, since the middle of the last century, has been busy putting
the world out of joint.  Manufacture, on a small scale, created the
middle-class; on a large scale, it created the working-class, and raised
the elect of the middle-class to the throne, but only to overthrow them
the more surely when the time comes.  Meanwhile, it is an undenied and
easily explained fact that the numerous, petty middle-class of the "good
old times" has been annihilated by manufacture, and resolved into rich
capitalists on the one hand and poor workers on the other. {20}

The centralising tendency of manufacture does not, however, stop here.
Population becomes centralised just as capital does; and, very naturally,
since the human being, the worker, is regarded in manufacture simply as a
piece of capital for the use of which the manufacturer pays interest
under the name of wages.  A manufacturing establishment requires many
workers employed together in a single building, living near each other
and forming a village of themselves in the case of a good-sized factory.
They have needs for satisfying which other people are necessary;
handicraftsmen, shoemakers, tailors, bakers, carpenters, stonemasons,
settle at hand.  The inhabitants of the village, especially the younger
generation, accustom themselves to factory work, grow skilful in it, and
when the first mill can no longer employ them all, wages fall, and the
immigration of fresh manufacturers is the consequence.  So the village
grows into a small town, and the small town into a large one.  The
greater the town, the greater its advantages.  It offers roads,
railroads, canals; the choice of skilled labour increases constantly, new
establishments can be built more cheaply because of the competition among
builders and machinists who are at hand, than in remote country
districts, whither timber, machinery, builders, and operatives must be
brought; it offers a market to which buyers crowd, and direct
communication with the markets supplying raw material or demanding
finished goods.  Hence the marvellously rapid growth of the great
manufacturing towns.  The country, on the other hand, has the advantage
that wages are usually lower than in town, and so town and country are in
constant competition; and, if the advantage is on the side of the town to-
day, wages sink so low in the country to-morrow, that new investments are
most profitably made there.  But the centralising tendency of manufacture
continues in full force, and every new factory built in the country bears
in it the germ of a manufacturing town.  If it were possible for this mad
rush of manufacture to go on at this rate for another century, every
manufacturing district of England would be one great manufacturing town,
and Manchester and Liverpool would meet at Warrington or Newton; for in
commerce, too, this centralisation of the population works in precisely
the same way, and hence it is that one or two great harbours, such as
Hull and Liverpool, Bristol, and London, monopolise almost the whole
maritime commerce of Great Britain.

Since commerce and manufacture attain their most complete development in
these great towns, their influence upon the proletariat is also most
clearly observable here.  Here the centralisation of property has reached
the highest point; here the morals and customs of the good old times are
most completely obliterated; here it has gone so far that the name Merry
Old England conveys no meaning, for Old England itself is unknown to
memory and to the tales of our grandfathers.  Hence, too, there exist
here only a rich and a poor class, for the lower middle-class vanishes
more completely with every passing day.  Thus the class formerly most
stable has become the most restless one.  It consists to-day of a few
remnants of a past time, and a number of people eager to make fortunes,
industrial Micawbers and speculators of whom one may amass a fortune,
while ninety-nine become insolvent, and more than half of the ninety-nine
live by perpetually repeated failure.

But in these towns the proletarians are the infinite majority, and how
they fare, what influence the great town exercises upon them, we have now
to investigate.




THE GREAT TOWNS.


A town, such as London, where a man may wander for hours together without
reaching the beginning of the end, without meeting the slightest hint
which could lead to the inference that there is open country within
reach, is a strange thing.  This colossal centralisation, this heaping
together of two and a half millions of human beings at one point, has
multiplied the power of this two and a half millions a hundredfold; has
raised London to the commercial capital of the world, created the giant
docks and assembled the thousand vessels that continually cover the
Thames.  I know nothing more imposing than the view which the Thames
offers during the ascent from the sea to London Bridge.  The masses of
buildings, the wharves on both sides, especially from Woolwich upwards,
the countless ships along both shores, crowding ever closer and closer
together, until, at last, only a narrow passage remains in the middle of
the river, a passage through which hundreds of steamers shoot by one
another; all this is so vast, so impressive, that a man cannot collect
himself, but is lost in the marvel of England's greatness before he sets
foot upon English soil. {23}

But the sacrifices which all this has cost become apparent later.  After
roaming the streets of the capital a day or two, making headway with
difficulty through the human turmoil and the endless lines of vehicles,
after visiting the slums of the metropolis, one realises for the first
time that these Londoners have been forced to sacrifice the best
qualities of their human nature, to bring to pass all the marvels of
civilisation which crowd their city; that a hundred powers which
slumbered within them have remained inactive, have been suppressed in
order that a few might be developed more fully and multiply through union
with those of others.  The very turmoil of the streets has something
repulsive, something against which human nature rebels.  The hundreds of
thousands of all classes and ranks crowding past each other, are they not
all human beings with the same qualities and powers, and with the same
interest in being happy?  And have they not, in the end, to seek
happiness in the same way, by the same means?  And still they crowd by
one another as though they had nothing in common, nothing to do with one
another, and their only agreement is the tacit one, that each keep to his
own side of the pavement, so as not to delay the opposing streams of the
crowd, while it occurs to no man to honour another with so much as a
glance.  The brutal indifference, the unfeeling isolation of each in his
private interest becomes the more repellant and offensive, the more these
individuals are crowded together, within a limited space.  And, however
much one may be aware that this isolation of the individual, this narrow
self-seeking is the fundamental principle of our society everywhere, it
is nowhere so shamelessly barefaced, so self-conscious as just here in
the crowding of the great city.  The dissolution of mankind into monads,
of which each one has a separate principle, the world of atoms, is here
carried out to its utmost extreme.

Hence it comes, too, that the social war, the war of each against all, is
here openly declared.  Just as in Stirner's recent book, people regard
each other only as useful objects; each exploits the other, and the end
of it all is, that the stronger treads the weaker under foot, and that
the powerful few, the capitalists, seize everything for themselves, while
to the weak many, the poor, scarcely a bare existence remains.

What is true of London, is true of Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, is true
of all great towns.  Everywhere barbarous indifference, hard egotism on
one hand, and nameless misery on the other, everywhere social warfare,
every man's house in a state of siege, everywhere reciprocal plundering
under the protection of the law, and all so shameless, so openly avowed
that one shrinks before the consequences of our social state as they
manifest themselves here undisguised, and can only wonder that the whole
crazy fabric still hangs together.

Since capital, the direct or indirect control of the means of subsistence
and production, is the weapon with which this social warfare is carried
on, it is clear that all the disadvantages of such a state must fall upon
the poor.  For him no man has the slightest concern.  Cast into the
whirlpool, he must struggle through as well as he can.  If he is so happy
as to find work, _i.e_., if the bourgeoisie does him the favour to enrich
itself by means of him, wages await him which scarcely suffice to keep
body and soul together; if he can get no work he may steal, if he is not
afraid of the police, or starve, in which case the police will take care
that he does so in a quiet and inoffensive manner.  During my residence
in England, at least twenty or thirty persons have died of simple
starvation under the most revolting circumstances, and a jury has rarely
been found possessed of the courage to speak the plain truth in the
matter.  Let the testimony of the witnesses be never so clear and
unequivocal, the bourgeoisie, from which the jury is selected, always
finds some backdoor through which to escape the frightful verdict, death
from starvation.  The bourgeoisie dare not speak the truth in these
cases, for it would speak its own condemnation.  But indirectly, far more
than directly, many have died of starvation, where long continued want of
proper nourishment has called forth fatal illness, when it has produced
such debility that causes which might otherwise have remained
inoperative, brought on severe illness and death.  The English working-
men call this "social murder," and accuse our whole society of
perpetrating this crime perpetually.  Are they wrong?

True, it is only individuals who starve, but what security has the
working-man that it may not be his turn to-morrow?  Who assures him
employment, who vouches for it that, if for any reason or no reason his
lord and master discharges him to-morrow, he can struggle along with
those dependent upon him, until he may find some one else "to give him
bread?"  Who guarantees that willingness to work shall suffice to obtain
work, that uprightness, industry, thrift, and the rest of the virtues
recommended by the bourgeoisie, are really his road to happiness?  No
one.  He knows that he has something to-day, and that it does not depend
upon himself whether he shall have something to-morrow.  He knows that
every breeze that blows, every whim of his employer, every bad turn of
trade may hurl him back into the fierce whirlpool from which he has
temporarily saved himself, and in which it is hard and often impossible
to keep his head above water.  He knows that, though he may have the
means of living to-day, it is very uncertain whether he shall to-morrow.

Meanwhile, let us proceed to a more detailed investigation of the
position, in which the social war has placed the non-possessing class.
Let us see what pay for his work society does give the working-man in the
form of dwelling, clothing, food, what sort of subsistence it grants
those who contribute most to the maintenance of society; and, first, let
us consider the dwellings.

Every great city has one or more slums, where the working-class is
crowded together.  True, poverty often dwells in hidden alleys close to
the palaces of the rich; but, in general, a separate territory has been
assigned to it, where, removed from the sight of the happier classes, it
may struggle along as it can.  These slums are pretty equally arranged in
all the great towns of England, the worst houses in the worst quarters of
the towns; usually one or two-storied cottages in long rows, perhaps with
cellars used as dwellings, almost always irregularly built.  These houses
of three or four rooms and a kitchen form, throughout England, some parts
of London excepted, the general dwellings of the working-class.  The
streets are generally unpaved, rough, dirty, filled with vegetable and
animal refuse, without sewers or gutters, but supplied with foul,
stagnant pools instead.  Moreover, ventilation is impeded by the bad,
confused method of building of the whole quarter, and since many human
beings here live crowded into a small space, the atmosphere that prevails
in these working-men's quarters may readily be imagined.  Further, the
streets serve as drying grounds in fine weather; lines are stretched
across from house to house, and hung with wet clothing.

Let us investigate some of the slums in their order.  London comes first,
and in London the famous rookery of St. Giles which is now, at last,
about to be penetrated by a couple of broad streets.  St. Giles is in the
midst of the most populous part of the town, surrounded by broad,
splendid avenues in which the gay world of London idles about, in the
immediate neighbourhood of Oxford Street, Regent Street, of Trafalgar
Square and the Strand.  It is a disorderly collection of tall, three or
four-storied houses, with narrow, crooked, filthy streets, in which there
is quite as much life as in the great thoroughfares of the town, except
that, here, people of the working-class only are to be seen.  A vegetable
market is held in the street, baskets with vegetables and fruits,
naturally all bad and hardly fit to use, obstruct the sidewalk still
further, and from these, as well as from the fish-dealers' stalls, arises
a horrible smell.  The houses are occupied from cellar to garret, filthy
within and without, and their appearance is such that no human being
could possibly wish to live in them.  But all this is nothing in
comparison with the dwellings in the narrow courts and alleys between the
streets, entered by covered passages between the houses, in which the
filth and tottering ruin surpass all description.  Scarcely a whole
window-pane can be found, the walls are crumbling, door-posts and window-
frames loose and broken, doors of old boards nailed together, or
altogether wanting in this thieves' quarter, where no doors are needed,
there being nothing to steal.  Heaps of garbage and ashes lie in all
directions, and the foul liquids emptied before the doors gather in
stinking pools.  Here live the poorest of the poor, the worst paid
workers with thieves and the victims of prostitution indiscriminately
huddled together, the majority Irish, or of Irish extraction, and those
who have not yet sunk in the whirlpool of moral ruin which surrounds
them, sinking daily deeper, losing daily more and more of their power to
resist the demoralising influence of want, filth, and evil surroundings.

Nor is St. Giles the only London slum.  In the immense tangle of streets,
there are hundreds and thousands of alleys and courts lined with houses
too bad for anyone to live in, who can still spend anything whatsoever
upon a dwelling fit for human beings.  Close to the splendid houses of
the rich such a lurking-place of the bitterest poverty may often be
found.  So, a short time ago, on the occasion of a coroner's inquest, a
region close to Portman Square, one of the very respectable squares, was
characterised as an abode "of a multitude of Irish demoralised by poverty
and filth."  So, too, may be found in streets, such as Long Acre and
others, which, though not fashionable, are yet "respectable," a great
number of cellar dwellings out of which puny children and half-starved,
ragged women emerge into the light of day.  In the immediate
neighbourhood of Drury Lane Theatre, the second in London, are some of
the worst streets of the whole metropolis, Charles, King, and Park
Streets, in which the houses are inhabited from cellar to garret
exclusively by poor families.  In the parishes of St. John and St.
Margaret there lived in 1840, according to the _Journal of the
Statistical Society_, 5,366 working-men's families in 5,294 "dwellings"
(if they deserve the name!), men, women, and children thrown together
without distinction of age or sex, 26,830 persons all told; and of these
families three-fourths possessed but one room.  In the aristocratic
parish of St. George, Hanover Square, there lived, according to the same
authority, 1,465 working-men's families, nearly 6,000 persons, under
similar conditions, and here, too, more than two-thirds of the whole
number crowded together at the rate of one family in one room.  And how
the poverty of these unfortunates, among whom even thieves find nothing
to steal, is exploited by the property-holding class in lawful ways!  The
abominable dwellings in Drury Lane, just mentioned, bring in the
following rents: two cellar dwellings, 3s.; one room, ground-floor, 4s.;
second-storey, 4s. 6d.; third-floor, 4s.; garret-room, 3s. weekly, so
that the starving occupants of Charles Street alone, pay the house-owners
a yearly tribute of 2,000 pounds, and the 5,336 families above mentioned
in Westminster, a yearly rent of 40,000 pounds.

The most extensive working-people's district lies east of the Tower in
Whitechapel and Bethnal Green, where the greatest masses of London
working-people live.  Let us hear Mr. G. Alston, preacher of St.
Philip's, Bethnal Green, on the condition of his parish.  He says:

   "It contains 1,400 houses, inhabited by 2,795 families, or about
   12,000 persons.  The space upon which this large population dwells, is
   less than 400 yards (1,200 feet) square, and in this overcrowding it
   is nothing unusual to find a man, his wife, four or five children,
   and, sometimes, both grandparents, all in one single room, where they
   eat, sleep, and work.  I believe that before the Bishop of London
   called attention to this most poverty-stricken parish, people at the
   West End knew as little of it as of the savages of Australia or the
   South Sea Isles.  And if we make ourselves acquainted with these
   unfortunates, through personal observation, if we watch them at their
   scanty meal and see them bowed by illness and want of work, we shall
   find such a mass of helplessness and misery, that a nation like ours
   must blush that these things can be possible.  I was rector near
   Huddersfield during the three years in which the mills were at their
   worst, but I have never seen such complete helplessness of the poor as
   since then in Bethnal Green.  Not one father of a family in ten in the
   whole neighbourhood has other clothing than his working suit, and that
   is as bad and tattered as possible; many, indeed, have no other
   covering for the night than these rags, and no bed, save a sack of
   straw and shavings."

The foregoing description furnishes an idea of the aspect of the interior
of the dwellings.  But let us follow the English officials, who
occasionally stray thither, into one or two of these working-men's homes.

On the occasion of an inquest held Nov. 14th, 1843, by Mr. Carter,
coroner for Surrey, upon the body of Ann Galway, aged 45 years, the
newspapers related the following particulars concerning the deceased: She
had lived at No. 3 White Lion Court, Bermondsey Street, London, with her
husband and a nineteen-year-old son in a little room, in which neither a
bedstead nor any other furniture was to be seen.  She lay dead beside her
son upon a heap of feathers which were scattered over her almost naked
body, there being neither sheet nor coverlet.  The feathers stuck so fast
over the whole body that the physician could not examine the corpse until
it was cleansed, and then found it starved and scarred from the bites of
vermin.  Part of the floor of the room was torn up, and the hole used by
the family as a privy.

On Monday, Jan. 15th, 1844, two boys were brought before the police
magistrate because, being in a starving condition, they had stolen and
immediately devoured a half-cooked calf's foot from a shop.  The
magistrate felt called upon to investigate the case further, and received
the following details from the policeman: The mother of the two boys was
the widow of an ex-soldier, afterwards policeman, and had had a very hard
time since the death of her husband, to provide for her nine children.
She lived at No. 2 Pool's Place, Quaker Court, Spitalfields, in the
utmost poverty.  When the policeman came to her, he found her with six of
her children literally huddled together in a little back room, with no
furniture but two old rush-bottomed chairs with the seats gone, a small
table with two legs broken, a broken cup, and a small dish.  On the
hearth was scarcely a spark of fire, and in one corner lay as many old
rags as would fill a woman's apron, which served the whole family as a
bed.  For bed clothing they had only their scanty day clothing.  The poor
woman told him that she had been forced to sell her bedstead the year
before to buy food.  Her bedding she had pawned with the victualler for
food.  In short, everything had gone for food.  The magistrate ordered
the woman a considerable provision from the poor-box.

In February, 1844, Theresa Bishop, a widow 60 years old, was recommended,
with her sick daughter, aged 26, to the compassion of the police
magistrate in Marlborough Street.  She lived at No. 5 Brown Street,
Grosvenor Square, in a small back room no larger than a closet, in which
there was not one single piece of furniture.  In one corner lay some rags
upon which both slept; a chest served as table and chair.  The mother
earned a little by charring.  The owner of the house said that they had
lived in this way since May, 1843, had gradually sold or pawned
everything that they had, and had still never paid any rent.  The
magistrate assigned them 1 pound from the poor-box.

I am far from asserting that _all_ London working-people live in such
want as the foregoing three families.  I know very well that ten are
somewhat better off, where one is so totally trodden under foot by
society; but I assert that thousands of industrious and worthy people--far
worthier and more to be respected than all the rich of London--do find
themselves in a condition unworthy of human beings; and that every
proletarian, everyone, without exception, is exposed to a similar fate
without any fault of his own and in spite of every possible effort.

But in spite of all this, they who have some kind of a shelter are
fortunate, fortunate in comparison with the utterly homeless.  In London
fifty thousand human beings get up every morning, not knowing where they
are to lay their heads at night.  The luckiest of this multitude, those
who succeed in keeping a penny or two until evening, enter a
lodging-house, such as abound in every great city, where they find a bed.
But what a bed!  These houses are filled with beds from cellar to garret,
four, five, six beds in a room; as many as can be crowded in.  Into every
bed four, five, or six human beings are piled, as many as can be packed
in, sick and well, young and old, drunk and sober, men and women, just as
they come, indiscriminately.  Then come strife, blows, wounds, or, if
these bedfellows agree, so much the worse; thefts are arranged and things
done which our language, grown more humane than our deeds, refuses to
record.  And those who cannot pay for such a refuge?  They sleep where
they find a place, in passages, arcades, in corners where the police and
the owners leave them undisturbed.  A few individuals find their way to
the refuges which are managed, here and there, by private charity, others
sleep on the benches in the parks close under the windows of Queen
Victoria.  Let us hear the London _Times_:

   "It appears from the report of the proceedings at Marlborough Street
   Police Court in our columns of yesterday, that there is an average
   number of 50 human beings of all ages, who huddle together in the
   parks every night, having no other shelter than what is supplied by
   the trees and a few hollows of the embankment.  Of these, the majority
   are young girls who have been seduced from the country by the soldiers
   and turned loose on the world in all the destitution of friendless
   penury, and all the recklessness of early vice.

   "This is truly horrible!  Poor there must be everywhere.  Indigence
   will find its way and set up its hideous state in the heart of a great
   and luxurious city.  Amid the thousand narrow lanes and by-streets of
   a populous metropolis there must always, we fear, be much
   suffering--much that offends the eye--much that lurks unseen.

   "But that within the precincts of wealth, gaiety, and fashion, nigh
   the regal grandeur of St. James, close on the palatial splendour of
   Bayswater, on the confines of the old and new aristocratic quarters,
   in a district where the cautious refinement of modern design has
   refrained from creating one single tenement for poverty; which seems,
   as it were, dedicated to the exclusive enjoyment of wealth, that
   _there_ want, and famine, and disease, and vice should stalk in all
   their kindred horrors, consuming body by body, soul, by soul!

   "It is indeed a monstrous state of things!  Enjoyment the most
   absolute, that bodily ease, intellectual excitement, or the more
   innocent pleasures of sense can supply to man's craving, brought in
   close contact with the most unmitigated misery!  Wealth, from its
   bright saloons, laughing--an insolently heedless laugh--at the unknown
   wounds of want!  Pleasure, cruelly but unconsciously mocking the pain
   that moans below!  All contrary things mocking one another--all
   contrary, save the vice which tempts and the vice which is tempted!

   "But let all men remember this--that within the most courtly precincts
   of the richest city of God's earth, there may be found, night after
   night, winter after winter, women--young in years--old in sin and
   suffering--outcasts from society--ROTTING FROM FAMINE, FILTH, AND
   DISEASE.  Let them remember this, and learn not to theorise but to
   act.  God knows, there is much room for action nowadays." {32}

I have referred to the refuges for the homeless.  How greatly overcrowded
these are, two examples may show.  A newly erected Refuge for the
Houseless in Upper Ogle Street, that can shelter three hundred persons
every night, has received since its opening, January 27th to March 17th,
1844, 2,740 persons for one or more nights; and, although the season was
growing more favourable, the number of applicants in this, as well as in
the asylums of Whitecross Street and Wapping, was strongly on the
increase, and a crowd of the homeless had to be sent away every night for
want of room.  In another refuge, the Central Asylum in Playhouse Yard,
there were supplied on an average 460 beds nightly, during the first
three months of the year 1844, 6,681 persons being sheltered, and 96,141
portions of bread were distributed.  Yet the committee of directors
declare this institution began to meet the pressure of the needy to a
limited extent only when the Eastern Asylum also was opened.

Let us leave London and examine the other great cities of the three
kingdoms in their order.  Let us take Dublin first, a city the approach
to which from the sea is as charming as that of London is imposing.  The
Bay of Dublin is the most beautiful of the whole British Island Kingdom,
and is even compared by the Irish with the Bay of Naples.  The city, too,
possesses great attractions, and its aristocratic districts are better
and more tastefully laid out than those of any other British city.  By
way of compensation, however, the poorer districts of Dublin are among
the most hideous and repulsive to be seen in the world.  True, the Irish
character, which, under some circumstances, is comfortable only in the
dirt, has some share in this; but as we find thousands of Irish in every
great city in England and Scotland, and as every poor population must
gradually sink into the same uncleanliness, the wretchedness of Dublin is
nothing specific, nothing peculiar to Dublin, but something common to all
great towns.  The poor quarters of Dublin are extremely extensive, and
the filth, the uninhabitableness of the houses and the neglect of the
streets, surpass all description.  Some idea of the manner in which the
poor are here crowded together may be formed from the fact that, in 1817,
according to the report of the Inspector of Workhouses, {33} 1,318
persons lived in 52 houses with 390 rooms in Barral Street, and 1,997
persons in 71 houses with 393 rooms in and near Church Street; that:

   "In this and the adjoining district there exists a multitude of foul
   courts and alleys; many cellars receive all their light through the
   door, while in not a few the inhabitants sleep upon the bare floor,
   though most of them possess bedsteads at least; Nicholson's Court, for
   example, contains twenty-eight wretched little rooms with 151 human
   beings in the greatest want, there being but two bedsteads and two
   blankets to be found in the whole court."

The poverty is so great in Dublin, that a single benevolent institution,
the Mendicity Association, gives relief to 2,500 persons or one per cent.
of the population daily, receiving and feeding them for the day and
dismissing them at night.

Dr. Alison describes a similar state of things in Edinburgh, whose superb
situation, which has won it the title of the Modern Athens, and whose
brilliant aristocratic quarter in the New Town, contrast strongly with
the foul wretchedness of the poor in the Old Town.  Alison asserts that
this extensive quarter is as filthy and horrible as the worst district of
Dublin, while the Mendicity Association would have as great a proportion
of needy persons to assist in Edinburgh as in the Irish capital.  He
asserts, indeed, that the poor in Scotland, especially in Edinburgh and
Glasgow, are worse off than in any other region of the three kingdoms,
and that the poorest are not Irish, but Scotch.  The preacher of the Old
Church of Edinburgh, Dr. Lee, testified in 1836, before the Commission of
Religious Instruction, that:

   "He had never before seen such misery as in his parish, where the
   people were without furniture, without everything, two married couples
   often sharing one room.  In a single day he had visited seven houses
   in which there was not a bed, in some of them not even a heap of
   straw.  Old people of eighty years sleep on the board floor, nearly
   all slept in their day-clothes.  In one cellar room he found two
   families from a Scotch country district; soon after their removal to
   the city two of the children had died, and a third was dying at the
   time of his visit.  Each family had a filthy pile of straw lying in a
   corner; the cellar sheltered besides the two families a donkey, and
   was, moreover, so dark that it was impossible to distinguish one
   person from another by day.  Dr. Lee declared that it was enough to
   make a heart of adamant bleed to see such misery in a country like
   Scotland."

In the Edinburgh _Medical and Surgical Journal_, Dr. Hennan reports a
similar state of things.  From a Parliamentary Report, {35a} it is
evident that in the dwellings of the poor of Edinburgh a want of
cleanliness reigns, such as must be expected under these conditions.  On
the bed-posts chickens roost at night, dogs and horses share the
dwellings of human beings, and the natural consequence is a shocking
stench, with filth and swarms of vermin.  The prevailing construction of
Edinburgh favours these atrocious conditions as far as possible.  The Old
Town is built upon both slopes of a hill, along the crest of which runs
the High Street.  Out of the High Street there open downwards multitudes
of narrow, crooked alleys, called wynds from their many turnings, and
these wynds form the proletarian district of the city.  The houses of the
Scotch cities, in general, are five or six-storied buildings, like those
of Paris, and in contrast with England where, so far as possible, each
family has a separate house.  The crowding of human beings upon a limited
area is thus intensified. {35b}

   "These streets," says an English journal in an article upon the
   sanitary condition of the working-people in cities, "are often so
   narrow that a person can step from the window of one house into that
   of its opposite neighbour, while the houses are piled so high, storey
   upon storey, that the light can scarcely penetrate into the court or
   alley that lies between.  In this part of the city there are neither
   sewers nor other drains, nor even privies belonging to the houses.  In
   consequence, all refuse, garbage, and excrements of at least 50,000
   persons are thrown into the gutters every night, so that, in spite of
   all street sweeping, a mass of dried filth and foul vapours are
   created, which not only offend the sight and smell, but endanger the
   health of the inhabitants in the highest degree.  Is it to be wondered
   at, that in such localities all considerations of health, morals, and
   even the most ordinary decency are utterly neglected?  On the
   contrary, all who are more intimately acquainted with the condition of
   the inhabitants will testify to the high degree which disease,
   wretchedness, and demoralisation have here reached.  Society in such
   districts has sunk to a level indescribably low and hopeless.  The
   houses of the poor are generally filthy, and are evidently never
   cleansed.  They consist in most cases of a single room which, while
   subject to the worst ventilation, is yet usually kept cold by the
   broken and badly fitting windows, and is sometimes damp and partly
   below ground level, always badly furnished and thoroughly
   uncomfortable, a straw-heap often serving the whole family for a bed,
   upon which men and women, young and old, sleep in revolting confusion.
   Water can be had only from the public pumps, and the difficulty of
   obtaining it naturally fosters all possible filth."

In the other great seaport towns the prospect is no better.  Liverpool,
with all its commerce, wealth, and grandeur yet treats its workers with
the same barbarity.  A full fifth of the population, more than 45,000
human beings, live in narrow, dark, damp, badly-ventilated cellar
dwellings, of which there are 7,862 in the city.  Besides these cellar
dwellings there are 2,270 courts, small spaces built up on all four sides
and having but one entrance, a narrow, covered passage-way, the whole
ordinarily very dirty and inhabited exclusively by proletarians.  Of such
courts we shall have more to say when we come to Manchester.  In Bristol,
on one occasion, 2,800 families were visited, of whom 46 per cent.
occupied but one room each.

Precisely the same state of things prevails in the factory towns.  In
Nottingham there are in all 11,000 houses, of which between 7,000 and
8,000 are built back to back with a rear parti-wall so that no through
ventilation is possible, while a single privy usually serves for several
houses.  During an investigation made a short time since, many rows of
houses were found to have been built over shallow drains covered only by
the boards of the ground floor.  In Leicester, Derby, and Sheffield, it
is no better.  Of Birmingham, the article above cited from the _Artisan_
states:

   "In the older quarters of the city there are many bad districts,
   filthy and neglected, full of stagnant pools and heaps of refuse.
   Courts are very numerous in Birmingham, reaching two thousand, and
   containing the greater number of the working-people of the city.  These
   courts are usually narrow, muddy, badly ventilated, ill-drained, and
   lined with eight to twenty houses, which, by reason of having their
   rear walls in common, can usually be ventilated from one side only.  In
   the background, within the court, there is usually an ash heap or
   something of the kind, the filth of which cannot be described.  It
   must, however, be observed that the newer courts are more sensibly
   built and more decently kept, and that even in the old ones, the
   cottages are much less crowded than in Manchester and Liverpool,
   wherefore Birmingham shows even during the reign of an epidemic a far
   smaller mortality than, for instance, Wolverhampton, Dudley, and
   Bilston, only a few miles distant.  Cellar dwellings are unknown, too,
   in Birmingham, though a few cellars are misused as workrooms.  The
   lodging-houses for proletarians are rather numerous (over four
   hundred), chiefly in courts in the heart of the town.  They are nearly
   all disgustingly filthy and ill-smelling, the refuge of beggars,
   thieves, tramps, and prostitutes, who eat, drink, smoke, and sleep
   here without the slightest regard to comfort or decency in an
   atmosphere endurable to these degraded beings only."

Glasgow is in many respects similar to Edinburgh, possessing the same
wynds, the same tall houses.  Of this city the _Artisan_ observes:

   "The working-class forms here some 78% of the whole population (about
   300,000), and lives in parts of the city which exceed in wretchedness
   and squalor the lowest nooks of St. Giles and Whitechapel, the
   Liberties of Dublin, the Wynds of Edinburgh.  There are numbers of
   such localities in the heart of the city, south of the Trongate,
   westward from the Saltmarket, in Calton and off the High Street,
   endless labyrinths of lanes or wynds into which open at almost every
   step, courts or blind alleys, formed by ill-ventilated, high-piled,
   waterless, and dilapidated houses.  These are literally swarming with
   inhabitants.  They contain three or four families upon each floor,
   perhaps twenty persons.  In some cases each storey is let out in
   sleeping places, so that fifteen to twenty persons are packed, one on
   top of the other, I cannot say accommodated, in a single room.  These
   districts shelter the poorest, most depraved, and worthless members of
   the community, and may be regarded as the sources of those frightful
   epidemics which, beginning here, spread desolation over Glasgow."

Let us hear how J. C. Symonds, Government Commissioner for the
investigation of the condition of the hand-weavers, describes these
portions of the city: {38}

   "I have seen wretchedness in some of its worse phases both here and
   upon the Continent, but until I visited the wynds of Glasgow I did not
   believe that so much crime, misery, and disease could exist in any
   civilised country.  In the lower lodging-houses ten, twelve, sometimes
   twenty persons of both sexes, all ages and various degrees of
   nakedness, sleep indiscriminately huddled together upon the floor.
   These dwellings are usually so damp, filthy, and ruinous, that no one
   could wish to keep his horse in one of them."

And in another place:

   "The wynds of Glasgow contain a fluctuating population of fifteen to
   thirty thousand human beings.  This quarter consists wholly of narrow
   alleys and square courts, in the middle of every one of which there
   lies a dung heap.  Revolting as was the outward appearance of these
   courts, I was yet not prepared for the filth and wretchedness within.
   In some of the sleeping-places which we visited at night (the
   Superintendent of Police, Captain Miller, and Symonds) we found a
   complete layer of human beings stretched upon the floor, often fifteen
   to twenty, some clad, others naked, men and women indiscriminately.
   Their bed was a litter of mouldy straw, mixed with rags.  There was
   little or no furniture, and the only thing which gave these dens any
   shimmer of habitableness was a fire upon the hearth.  Theft and
   prostitution form the chief means of subsistence of this population.
   No one seemed to take the trouble to cleanse this Augean stable, this
   Pandemonium, this tangle of crime, filth, and pestilence in the centre
   of the second city of the kingdom.  An extended examination of the
   lowest districts of other cities never revealed anything half so bad,
   either in intensity of moral and physical infection, nor in
   comparative density of population.  In this quarter most of the houses
   have been declared by the Court of Guild ruinous and unfit for
   habitation, but precisely these are the most densely populated,
   because, according to the law, no rent can be demanded for them."

The great manufacturing district in the centre of the British Islands,
the thickly peopled stretch of West Yorkshire and South Lancashire, with
its numerous factory towns, yields nothing to the other great
manufacturing centres.  The woollen district of the West Riding of
Yorkshire is a charming region, a beautiful green hill country, whose
elevations grow more rugged towards the West until they reach their
highest point in the bold ridge of Blackstone Edge, the watershed between
the Irish Sea and the German Ocean.  The valleys of the Aire, along which
stretches Leeds, and of the Calder, through which the Manchester-Leeds
railway runs, are among the most attractive in England, and are strewn in
all directions with the factories, villages, and towns.  The houses of
rough grey stone look so neat and clean in comparison with the blackened
brick buildings of Lancashire, that it is a pleasure to look at them.  But
on coming into the towns themselves, one finds little to rejoice over.
Leeds lies as the _Artisan_ describes it, and as I found confirmed upon
examination: "on a gentle slope that descends into the valley of the
Aire.  This stream flows through the city for about a mile-and-a-half and
is exposed to violent floods during thaws or heavy rain.  The higher
western portions of the city are clean, for such a large town.  But the
low-lying districts along the river and its tributary becks are narrow,
dirty, and enough in themselves to shorten the lives of the inhabitants,
especially of little children.  Added to this, the disgusting state of
the working-men's districts about Kirkgate, Marsh Lane, Cross Street and
Richmond Road, which is chiefly attributable to their unpaved, drainless
streets, irregular architecture, numerous courts and alleys, and total
lack of the most ordinary means of cleanliness, all this taken together
is explanation enough of the excessive mortality in these unhappy abodes
of filthy misery.  In consequence of the overflows of the Aire" (which,
it must be added, like all other rivers in the service of manufacture,
flows into the city at one end clear and transparent, and flows out at
the other end thick, black, and foul, smelling of all possible refuse),
"the houses and cellars are often so full of water that they have to be
pumped out.  And at such times the water rises, even where there are
sewers, out of them into cellars, {40a} engenders miasmatic vapours
strongly impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen, and leaves a disgusting
residuum highly injurious to health.  During the spring-floods of 1839
the action of such a choking of the sewers was so injurious, that,
according to the report of the Registrar of Births and Deaths for this
part of the town, there were three deaths to two births, whereas in the
same three months, in every other part of the town, there were three
births to two deaths.  Other thickly populated districts are without any
sewers whatsoever, or so badly provided as to derive no benefit from
them.  In some rows of houses the cellars are seldom dry; in certain
districts there are several streets covered with soft mud a foot deep.
The inhabitants have made vain attempts from time to time to repair these
streets with shovelfuls of cinders, but in spite of all such attempts,
dung-heaps, and pools of dirty water emptied from the houses, fill all
the holes until wind and sun dry them up. {40b}  An ordinary cottage in
Leeds occupies not more than five yards square of land, and usually
consists of a cellar, a living room, and one sleeping-room.  These
contracted dwellings, filled day and night with human beings, are another
point dangerous alike to the morals and the health of the inhabitants."
And how greatly these cottages are crowded, the Report on the Health of
the Working-Classes, quoted above, bears testimony: "In Leeds we found
brothers and sisters, and lodgers of both sexes, sharing the parents'
sleeping-room, whence arise consequences at the contemplation of which
human feeling shudders."

So, too, Bradford, which, but seven miles from Leeds at the junction of
several valleys, lies upon the banks of a small, coal-black,
foul-smelling stream.  On week-days the town is enveloped in a grey cloud
of coal smoke, but on a fine Sunday it offers a superb picture, when
viewed from the surrounding heights.  Yet within reigns the same filth
and discomfort as in Leeds.  The older portions of the town are built
upon steep hillsides, and are narrow and irregular.  In the lanes,
alleys, and courts lie filth and _debris_ in heaps; the houses are
ruinous, dirty, and miserable, and in the immediate vicinity of the river
and the valley bottom I found many a one, whose ground-floor, half-buried
in the hillside, was totally abandoned.  In general, the portions of the
valley bottom in which working-men's cottages have crowded between the
tall factories, are among the worst built and dirtiest districts of the
whole town.  In the newer portions of this, as of every other factory
town, the cottages are more regular, being built in rows, but they share
here, too, all the evils incident to the customary method of providing
working-men's dwellings, evils of which we shall have occasions to speak
more particularly in discussing Manchester.  The same is true of the
remaining towns of the West Riding, especially of Barnsley, Halifax and
Huddersfield.  The last named, the handsomest by far of all the factory
towns of Yorkshire and Lancashire, by reason of its charming situation
and modern architecture, has yet its bad quarter; for a committee
appointed by a meeting of citizens to survey the town, reported August
5th, 1844: "It is notorious that in Huddersfield whole streets and many
lanes and courts are neither paved nor supplied with sewers nor other
drains; that in them refuse, _debris_, and filth of every sort lies
accumulating, festers and rots, and that, nearly everywhere, stagnant
water accumulates in pools, in consequence of which the adjoining
dwellings must inevitably be bad and filthy, so that in such places
diseases arise and threaten the health of the whole town."

If we cross Blackstone Edge or penetrate it with the railroad, we enter
upon that classic soil on which English manufacture has achieved its
masterwork and from which all labour movements emanate, namely, South
Lancashire with its central city Manchester.  Again we have beautiful
hill country, sloping gently from the watershed westwards towards the
Irish Sea, with the charming green valleys of the Ribble, the Irwell, the
Mersey, and their tributaries, a country which, a hundred years ago
chiefly swamp land, thinly populated, is now sown with towns and
villages, and is the most densely populated strip of country in England.
In Lancashire, and especially in Manchester, English manufacture finds at
once its starting point and its centre.  The Manchester Exchange is the
thermometer for all the fluctuations of trade.  The modern art of
manufacture has reached its perfection in Manchester.  In the cotton
industry of South Lancashire, the application of the forces of Nature,
the superseding of hand labour by machinery (especially by the power-loom
and the self-acting mule), and the division of labour, are seen at the
highest point; and, if we recognise in these three elements that which is
characteristic of modern manufacture, we must confess that the cotton
industry has remained in advance of all other branches of industry from
the beginning down to the present day.  The effects of modern manufacture
upon the working-class must necessarily develop here most freely and
perfectly, and the manufacturing proletariat present itself in its
fullest classic perfection.  The degradation to which the application of
steam-power, machinery and the division of labour reduce the working-man,
and the attempts of the proletariat to rise above this abasement, must
likewise be carried to the highest point and with the fullest
consciousness.  Hence because Manchester is the classic type of a modern
manufacturing town, and because I know it as intimately as my own native
town, more intimately than most of its residents know it, we shall make a
longer stay here.

The towns surrounding Manchester vary little from the central city, so
far as the working-people's quarters are concerned, except that the
working-class forms, if possible, a larger proportion of their
population.  These towns are purely industrial and conduct all their
business through Manchester upon which they are in every respect
dependent, whence they are inhabited only by working-men and petty
tradesmen, while Manchester has a very considerable commercial
population, especially of commission and "respectable" retail dealers.
Hence Bolton, Preston, Wigan, Bury, Rochdale, Middleton, Heywood, Oldham,
Ashton, Stalybridge, Stockport, etc., though nearly all towns of thirty,
fifty, seventy to ninety thousand inhabitants, are almost wholly working-
people's districts, interspersed only with factories, a few thoroughfares
lined with shops, and a few lanes along which the gardens and houses of
the manufacturers are scattered like villas.  The towns themselves are
badly and irregularly built with foul courts, lanes, and back alleys,
reeking of coal smoke, and especially dingy from the originally bright
red brick, turned black with time, which is here the universal building
material.  Cellar dwellings are general here; wherever it is in any way
possible, these subterranean dens are constructed, and a very
considerable portion of the population dwells in them.

Among the worst of these towns after Preston and Oldham is Bolton, eleven
miles north-west of Manchester.  It has, so far as I have been able to
observe in my repeated visits, but one main street, a very dirty one,
Deansgate, which serves as a market, and is even in the finest weather a
dark, unattractive hole in spite of the fact that, except for the
factories, its sides are formed by low one and two-storied houses.  Here,
as everywhere, the older part of the town is especially ruinous and
miserable.  A dark-coloured body of water, which leaves the beholder in
doubt whether it is a brook or a long string of stagnant puddles, flows
through the town and contributes its share to the total pollution of the
air, by no means pure without it.

There is Stockport, too, which lies on the Cheshire side of the Mersey,
but belongs nevertheless to the manufacturing district of Manchester.  It
lies in a narrow valley along the Mersey, so that the streets slope down
a steep hill on one side and up an equally steep one on the other, while
the railway from Manchester to Birmingham passes over a high viaduct
above the city and the whole valley.  Stockport is renowned throughout
the entire district as one of the duskiest, smokiest holes, and looks,
indeed, especially when viewed from the viaduct, excessively repellent.
But far more repulsive are the cottages and cellar dwellings of the
working-class, which stretch in long rows through all parts of the town
from the valley bottom to the crest of the hill.  I do not remember to
have seen so many cellars used as dwellings in any other town of this
district.

A few miles north-east of Stockport is Ashton-under-Lyne, one of the
newest factory towns of this region.  It stands on the slope of a hill at
the foot of which are the canal and the river Tame, and is, in general,
built on the newer, more regular plan.  Five or six parallel streets
stretch along the hill intersected at right angles by others leading down
into the valley.  By this method, the factories would be excluded from
the town proper, even if the proximity of the river and the canal-way did
not draw them all into the valley where they stand thickly crowded,
belching forth black smoke from their chimneys.  To this arrangement
Ashton owes a much more attractive appearance than that of most factory
towns; the streets are broad and cleaner, the cottages look new, bright
red, and comfortable.  But the modern system of building cottages for
working-men has its own disadvantages; every street has its concealed
back lane to which a narrow paved path leads, and which is all the
dirtier.  And, although I saw no buildings, except a few on entering,
which could have been more than fifty years old, there are even in Ashton
streets in which the cottages are getting bad, where the bricks in the
house-corners are no longer firm but shift about, in which the walls have
cracks and will not hold the chalk whitewash inside; streets, whose
dirty, smoke-begrimed aspect is nowise different from that of the other
towns of the district, except that in Ashton, this is the exception, not
the rule.

A mile eastward lies Stalybridge, also on the Tame.  In coming over the
hill from Ashton, the traveller has, at the top, both right and left,
fine large gardens with superb villa-like houses in their midst, built
usually in the Elizabethan style, which is to the Gothic precisely what
the Anglican Church is to the Apostolic Roman Catholic.  A hundred paces
farther and Stalybridge shows itself in the valley, in sharp contrast
with the beautiful country seats, in sharp contrast even with the modest
cottages of Ashton!  Stalybridge lies in a narrow, crooked ravine, much
narrower even than the valley at Stockport, and both sides of this ravine
are occupied by an irregular group of cottages, houses, and mills.  On
entering, the very first cottages are narrow, smoke-begrimed, old and
ruinous; and as the first houses, so the whole town.  A few streets lie
in the narrow valley bottom, most of them run criss-cross, pell-mell, up
hill and down, and in nearly all the houses, by reason of this sloping
situation, the ground floor is half-buried in the earth; and what
multitudes of courts, back lanes, and remote nooks arise out of this
confused way of building may be seen from the hills, whence one has the
town, here and there, in a bird's-eye view almost at one's feet.  Add to
this the shocking filth, and the repulsive effect of Stalybridge, in
spite of its pretty surroundings, may be readily imagined.

But enough of these little towns.  Each has its own peculiarities, but in
general, the working-people live in them just as in Manchester.  Hence I
have especially sketched only their peculiar construction, and would
observe, that all more general observations as to the condition of the
labouring population in Manchester are fully applicable to these
surrounding towns as well.

Manchester lies at the foot of the southern slope of a range of hills,
which stretch hither from Oldham, their last peak, Kersallmoor, being at
once the racecourse and the Mons Sacer of Manchester.  Manchester proper
lies on the left bank of the Irwell, between that stream and the two
smaller ones, the Irk and the Medlock, which here empty into the Irwell.
On the left bank of the Irwell, bounded by a sharp curve of the river,
lies Salford, and farther westward Pendleton; northward from the Irwell
lie Upper and Lower Broughton; northward of the Irk, Cheetham Hill; south
of the Medlock lies Hulme; farther east Chorlton on Medlock; still
farther, pretty well to the east of Manchester, Ardwick.  The whole
assemblage of buildings is commonly called Manchester, and contains about
four hundred thousand inhabitants, rather more than less.  The town
itself is peculiarly built, so that a person may live in it for years,
and go in and out daily without coming into contact with a
working-people's quarter or even with workers, that is, so long as he
confines himself to his business or to pleasure walks.  This arises
chiefly from the fact, that by unconscious tacit agreement, as well as
with outspoken conscious determination, the working-people's quarters are
sharply separated from the sections of the city reserved for the middle-
class; or, if this does not succeed, they are concealed with the cloak of
charity.  Manchester contains, at its heart, a rather extended commercial
district, perhaps half a mile long and about as broad, and consisting
almost wholly of offices and warehouses.  Nearly the whole district is
abandoned by dwellers, and is lonely and deserted at night; only watchmen
and policemen traverse its narrow lanes with their dark lanterns.  This
district is cut through by certain main thoroughfares upon which the vast
traffic concentrates, and in which the ground level is lined with
brilliant shops.  In these streets the upper floors are occupied, here
and there, and there is a good deal of life upon them until late at
night.  With the exception of this commercial district, all Manchester
proper, all Salford and Hulme, a great part of Pendleton and Chorlton,
two-thirds of Ardwick, and single stretches of Cheetham Hill and
Broughton are all unmixed working-people's quarters, stretching like a
girdle, averaging a mile and a half in breadth, around the commercial
district.  Outside, beyond this girdle, lives the upper and middle
bourgeoisie, the middle bourgeoisie in regularly laid out streets in the
vicinity of the working quarters, especially in Chorlton and the lower
lying portions of Cheetham Hill; the upper bourgeoisie in remoter villas
with gardens in Chorlton and Ardwick, or on the breezy heights of
Cheetham Hill, Broughton, and Pendleton, in free, wholesome country air,
in fine, comfortable homes, passed once every half or quarter hour by
omnibuses going into the city.  And the finest part of the arrangement is
this, that the members of this money aristocracy can take the shortest
road through the middle of all the labouring districts to their places of
business, without ever seeing that they are in the midst of the grimy
misery that lurks to the right and the left.  For the thoroughfares
leading from the Exchange in all directions out of the city are lined, on
both sides, with an almost unbroken series of shops, and are so kept in
the hands of the middle and lower bourgeoisie, which, out of
self-interest, cares for a decent and cleanly external appearance and
_can_ care for it.  True, these shops bear some relation to the districts
which lie behind them, and are more elegant in the commercial and
residential quarters than when they hide grimy working-men's dwellings;
but they suffice to conceal from the eyes of the wealthy men and women of
strong stomachs and weak nerves the misery and grime which form the
complement of their wealth.  So, for instance, Deansgate, which leads
from the Old Church directly southward, is lined first with mills and
warehouses, then with second-rate shops and alehouses; farther south,
when it leaves the commercial district, with less inviting shops, which
grow dirtier and more interrupted by beerhouses and gin palaces the
farther one goes, until at the southern end the appearance of the shops
leaves no doubt that workers and workers only are their customers.  So
Market Street running south-east from the Exchange; at first brilliant
shops of the best sort, with counting-houses or warehouses above; in the
continuation, Piccadilly, immense hotels and warehouses; in the farther
continuation, London Road, in the neighbourhood of the Medlock,
factories, beerhouses, shops for the humbler bourgeoisie and the working
population; and from this point onward, large gardens and villas of the
wealthier merchants and manufacturers.  In this way any one who knows
Manchester can infer the adjoining districts, from the appearance of the
thoroughfare, but one is seldom in a position to catch from the street a
glimpse of the real labouring districts.  I know very well that this
hypocritical plan is more or less common to all great cities; I know,
too, that the retail dealers are forced by the nature of their business
to take possession of the great highways; I know that there are more good
buildings than bad ones upon such streets everywhere, and that the value
of land is greater near them than in remoter districts; but at the same
time I have never seen so systematic a shutting out of the working-class
from the thoroughfares, so tender a concealment of everything which might
affront the eye and the nerves of the bourgeoisie, as in Manchester.  And
yet, in other respects, Manchester is less built according to a plan,
after official regulations, is more an outgrowth of accident, than any
other city; and when I consider in this connection the eager assurances
of the middle-class, that the working-class is doing famously, I cannot
help feeling that the liberal manufacturers, the "Big Wigs" of
Manchester, are not so innocent after all, in the matter of this
sensitive method of construction.

I may mention just here that the mills almost all adjoin the rivers or
the different canals that ramify throughout the city, before I proceed at
once to describe the labouring quarters.  First of all, there is the old
town of Manchester, which lies between the northern boundary of the
commercial district and the Irk.  Here the streets, even the better ones,
are narrow and winding, as Todd Street, Long Millgate, Withy Grove, and
Shude Hill, the houses dirty, old, and tumble-down, and the construction
of the side streets utterly horrible.  Going from the Old Church to Long
Millgate, the stroller has at once a row of old-fashioned houses at the
right, of which not one has kept its original level; these are remnants
of the old pre-manufacturing Manchester, whose former inhabitants have
removed with their descendants into better-built districts, and have left
the houses, which were not good enough for them, to a population strongly
mixed with Irish blood.  Here one is in an almost undisguised working-
men's quarter, for even the shops and beerhouses hardly take the trouble
to exhibit a trifling degree of cleanliness.  But all this is nothing in
comparison with the courts and lanes which lie behind, to which access
can be gained only through covered passages, in which no two human beings
can pass at the same time.  Of the irregular cramming together of
dwellings in ways which defy all rational plan, of the tangle in which
they are crowded literally one upon the other, it is impossible to convey
an idea.  And it is not the buildings surviving from the old times of
Manchester which are to blame for this; the confusion has only recently
reached its height when every scrap of space left by the old way of
building has been filled up and patched over until not a foot of land is
left to be further occupied.

The south bank of the Irk is here very steep and between fifteen and
thirty feet high.  On this declivitous hillside there are planted three
rows of houses, of which the lowest rise directly out of the river, while
the front walls of the highest stand on the crest of the hill in Long
Millgate.  Among them are mills on the river, in short, the method of
construction is as crowded and disorderly here as in the lower part of
Long Millgate.  Right and left a multitude of covered passages lead from
the main street into numerous courts, and he who turns in thither gets
into a filth and disgusting grime, the equal of which is not to be
found--especially in the courts which lead down to the Irk, and which
contain unqualifiedly the most horrible dwellings which I have yet
beheld.  In one of these courts there stands directly at the entrance, at
the end of the covered passage, a privy without a door, so dirty that the
inhabitants can pass into and out of the court only by passing through
foul pools of stagnant urine and excrement.  This is the first court on
the Irk above Ducie Bridge--in case any one should care to look into it.
Below it on the river there are several tanneries which fill the whole
neighbourhood with the stench of animal putrefaction.  Below Ducie Bridge
the only entrance to most of the houses is by means of narrow, dirty
stairs and over heaps of refuse and filth.  The first court below Ducie
Bridge, known as Allen's Court, was in such a state at the time of the
cholera that the sanitary police ordered it evacuated, swept, and
disinfected with chloride of lime.  Dr. Kay gives a terrible description
of the state of this court at that time. {49}  Since then, it seems to
have been partially torn away and rebuilt; at least looking down from
Ducie Bridge, the passer-by sees several ruined walls and heaps of debris
with some newer houses.  The view from this bridge, mercifully concealed
from mortals of small stature by a parapet as high as a man, is
characteristic for the whole district.  At the bottom flows, or rather
stagnates, the Irk, a narrow, coal-black, foul-smelling stream, full of
debris and refuse, which it deposits on the shallower right bank.  In dry
weather, a long string of the most disgusting, blackish-green, slime
pools are left standing on this bank, from the depths of which bubbles of
miasmatic gas constantly arise and give forth a stench unendurable even
on the bridge forty or fifty feet above the surface of the stream.  But
besides this, the stream itself is checked every few paces by high weirs,
behind which slime and refuse accumulate and rot in thick masses.  Above
the bridge are tanneries, bonemills, and gasworks, from which all drains
and refuse find their way into the Irk, which receives further the
contents of all the neighbouring sewers and privies.  It may be easily
imagined, therefore, what sort of residue the stream deposits.  Below the
bridge you look upon the piles of debris, the refuse, filth, and offal
from the courts on the steep left bank; here each house is packed close
behind its neighbour and a piece of each is visible, all black, smoky,
crumbling, ancient, with broken panes and window frames.  The background
is furnished by old barrack-like factory buildings.  On the lower right
bank stands a long row of houses and mills; the second house being a ruin
without a roof, piled with debris; the third stands so low that the
lowest floor is uninhabitable, and therefore without windows or doors.
Here the background embraces the pauper burial-ground, the station of the
Liverpool and Leeds railway, and, in the rear of this, the Workhouse, the
"Poor-Law Bastille" of Manchester, which, like a citadel, looks
threateningly down from behind its high walls and parapets on the
hilltop, upon the working-people's quarter below.

Above Ducie Bridge, the left bank grows more flat and the right bank
steeper, but the condition of the dwellings on both banks grows worse
rather than better.  He who turns to the left here from the main street,
Long Millgate, is lost; he wanders from one court to another, turns
countless corners, passes nothing but narrow, filthy nooks and alleys,
until after a few minutes he has lost all clue, and knows not whither to
turn.  Everywhere half or wholly ruined buildings, some of them actually
uninhabited, which means a great deal here; rarely a wooden or stone
floor to be seen in the houses, almost uniformly broken, ill-fitting
windows and doors, and a state of filth!  Everywhere heaps of debris,
refuse, and offal; standing pools for gutters, and a stench which alone
would make it impossible for a human being in any degree civilised to
live in such a district.  The newly-built extension of the Leeds railway,
which crosses the Irk here, has swept away some of these courts and
lanes, laying others completely open to view.  Immediately under the
railway bridge there stands a court, the filth and horrors of which
surpass all the others by far, just because it was hitherto so shut off,
so secluded that the way to it could not be found without a good deal of
trouble.  I should never have discovered it myself, without the breaks
made by the railway, though I thought I knew this whole region
thoroughly.  Passing along a rough bank, among stakes and washing-lines,
one penetrates into this chaos of small one-storied, one-roomed huts, in
most of which there is no artificial floor; kitchen, living and sleeping-
room all in one.  In such a hole, scarcely five feet long by six broad, I
found two beds--and such bedsteads and beds!--which, with a staircase and
chimney-place, exactly filled the room.  In several others I found
absolutely nothing, while the door stood open, and the inhabitants leaned
against it.  Everywhere before the doors refuse and offal; that any sort
of pavement lay underneath could not be seen but only felt, here and
there, with the feet.  This whole collection of cattle-sheds for human
beings was surrounded on two sides by houses and a factory, and on the
third by the river, and besides the narrow stair up the bank, a narrow
doorway alone led out into another almost equally ill-built, ill-kept
labyrinth of dwellings.

Enough!  The whole side of the Irk is built in this way, a planless,
knotted chaos of houses, more or less on the verge of uninhabitableness,
whose unclean interiors fully correspond with their filthy external
surroundings.  And how could the people be clean with no proper
opportunity for satisfying the most natural and ordinary wants?  Privies
are so rare here that they are either filled up every day, or are too
remote for most of the inhabitants to use.  How can people wash when they
have only the dirty Irk water at hand, while pumps and water pipes can be
found in decent parts of the city alone?  In truth, it cannot be charged
to the account of these helots of modern society if their dwellings are
not more cleanly than the pig-sties which are here and there to be seen
among them.  The landlords are not ashamed to let dwellings like the six
or seven cellars on the quay directly below Scotland Bridge, the floors
of which stand at least two feet below the low-water level of the Irk
that flows not six feet away from them; or like the upper floor of the
corner-house on the opposite shore directly above the bridge, where the
ground floor, utterly uninhabitable, stands deprived of all fittings for
doors and windows, a case by no means rare in this region, when this open
ground floor is used as a privy by the whole neighbourhood for want of
other facilities!

If we leave the Irk and penetrate once more on the opposite side from
Long Millgate into the midst of the working-men's dwellings, we shall
come into a somewhat newer quarter, which stretches from St. Michael's
Church to Withy Grove and Shude Hill.  Here there is somewhat better
order.  In place of the chaos of buildings, we find at least long
straight lanes and alleys or courts, built according to a plan and
usually square.  But if, in the former case, every house was built
according to caprice, here each lane and court is so built, without
reference to the situation of the adjoining ones.  The lanes run now in
this direction, now in that, while every two minutes the wanderer gets
into a blind alley, or, on turning a corner, finds himself back where he
started from; certainly no one who has not lived a considerable time in
this labyrinth can find his way through it.

If I may use the word at all in speaking of this district, the
ventilation of these streets and courts is, in consequence of this
confusion, quite as imperfect as in the Irk region; and if this quarter
may, nevertheless, be said to have some advantage over that of the Irk,
the houses being newer and the streets occasionally having gutters,
nearly every house has, on the other hand, a cellar dwelling, which is
rarely found in the Irk district, by reason of the greater age and more
careless construction of the houses.  As for the rest, the filth, debris,
and offal heaps, and the pools in the streets are common to both
quarters, and in the district now under discussion, another feature most
injurious to the cleanliness of the inhabitants, is the multitude of pigs
walking about in all the alleys, rooting into the offal heaps, or kept
imprisoned in small pens.  Here, as in most of the working-men's quarters
of Manchester, the pork-raisers rent the courts and build pig-pens in
them.  In almost every court one or even several such pens may be found,
into which the inhabitants of the court throw all refuse and offal,
whence the swine grow fat; and the atmosphere, confined on all four
sides, is utterly corrupted by putrefying animal and vegetable
substances.  Through this quarter, a broad and measurably decent street
has been cut, Millers Street, and the background has been pretty
successfully concealed.  But if any one should be led by curiosity to
pass through one of the numerous passages which lead into the courts, he
will find this piggery repeated at every twenty paces.

Such is the Old Town of Manchester, and on re-reading my description, I
am forced to admit that instead of being exaggerated, it is far from
black enough to convey a true impression of the filth, ruin, and
uninhabitableness, the defiance of all considerations of cleanliness,
ventilation, and health which characterise the construction of this
single district, containing at least twenty to thirty thousand
inhabitants.  And such a district exists in the heart of the second city
of England, the first manufacturing city of the world.  If any one wishes
to see in how little space a human being can move, how little air--and
_such_ air!--he can breathe, how little of civilisation he may share and
yet live, it is only necessary to travel hither.  True, this is the _Old_
Town, and the people of Manchester emphasise the fact whenever any one
mentions to them the frightful condition of this Hell upon Earth; but
what does that prove?  Everything which here arouses horror and
indignation is of recent origin, belongs to the _industrial epoch_.  The
couple of hundred houses, which belong to old Manchester, have been long
since abandoned by their original inhabitants; the industrial epoch alone
has crammed into them the swarms of workers whom they now shelter; the
industrial epoch alone has built up every spot between these old houses
to win a covering for the masses whom it has conjured hither from the
agricultural districts and from Ireland; the industrial epoch alone
enables the owners of these cattle-sheds to rent them for high prices to
human beings, to plunder the poverty of the workers, to undermine the
health of thousands, in order that they _alone_, the owners, may grow
rich.  In the industrial epoch alone has it become possible that the
worker scarcely freed from feudal servitude could be used as mere
material, a mere chattel; that he must let himself be crowded into a
dwelling too bad for every other, which he for his hard-earned wages buys
the right to let go utterly to ruin.  This manufacture has achieved,
which, without these workers, this poverty, this slavery could not have
lived.  True, the original construction of this quarter was bad, little
good could have been made out of it; but, have the landowners, has the
municipality done anything to improve it when rebuilding?  On the
contrary, wherever a nook or corner was free, a house has been run up;
where a superfluous passage remained, it has been built up; the value of
land rose with the blossoming out of manufacture, and the more it rose,
the more madly was the work of building up carried on, without reference
to the health or comfort of the inhabitants, with sole reference to the
highest possible profit on the principle that _no hole is so bad but that
some poor creature must take it who can pay for nothing better_.  However,
it is the Old Town, and with this reflection the bourgeoisie is
comforted.  Let us see, therefore, how much better it is in the New Town.

The New Town, known also as Irish Town, stretches up a hill of clay,
beyond the Old Town, between the Irk and St. George's Road.  Here all the
features of a city are lost.  Single rows of houses or groups of streets
stand, here and there, like little villages on the naked, not even grass-
grown clay soil; the houses, or rather cottages, are in bad order, never
repaired, filthy, with damp, unclean, cellar dwellings; the lanes are
neither paved nor supplied with sewers, but harbour numerous colonies of
swine penned in small sties or yards, or wandering unrestrained through
the neighbourhood.  The mud in the streets is so deep that there is never
a chance, except in the dryest weather, of walking without sinking into
it ankle deep at every step.  In the vicinity of St. George's Road, the
separate groups of buildings approach each other more closely, ending in
a continuation of lanes, blind alleys, back lanes and courts, which grow
more and more crowded and irregular the nearer they approach the heart of
the town.  True, they are here oftener paved or supplied with paved
sidewalks and gutters; but the filth, the bad order of the houses, and
especially of the cellars, remains the same.

It may not be out of place to make some general observations just here as
to the customary construction of working-men's quarters in Manchester.  We
have seen how in the Old Town pure accident determined the grouping of
the houses in general.  Every house is built without reference to any
other, and the scraps of space between them are called courts for want of
another name.  In the somewhat newer portions of the same quarter, and in
other working-men's quarters, dating from the early days of industrial
activity, a somewhat more orderly arrangement may be found.  The space
between two streets is divided into more regular, usually square courts.

These courts were built in this way from the beginning, and communicate
with the streets by means of covered passages.  If the totally planless
construction is injurious to the health of the workers by preventing
ventilation, this method of shutting them up in courts surrounded on all
sides by buildings is far more so.  The air simply cannot escape; the
chimneys of the houses are the sole drains for the imprisoned atmosphere
of the courts, and they serve the purpose only so long as fire is kept
burning. {55}  Moreover, the houses surrounding such courts are usually
built back to back, having the rear wall in common; and this alone
suffices to prevent any sufficient through ventilation.  And, as the
police charged with care of the streets, does not trouble itself about
the condition of these courts, as everything quietly lies where it is
thrown, there is no cause for wonder at the filth and heaps of ashes and
offal to be found here.  I have been in courts, in Millers Street, at
least half a foot below the level of the thoroughfares, and without the
slightest drainage for the water that accumulates in them in rainy
weather!  More recently another different method of building was adopted,
and has now become general.  Working-men's cottages are almost never
built singly, but always by the dozen or score; a single contractor
building up one or two streets at a time.  These are then arranged as
follows: One front is formed of cottages of the best class, so fortunate
as to possess a back door and small court, and these command the highest
rent.  In the rear of these cottages runs a narrow alley, the back
street, built up at both ends, into which either a narrow roadway or a
covered passage leads from one side.  The cottages which face this back
street command least rent, and are most neglected.  These have their rear
walls in common with the third row of cottages which face a second
street, and command less rent than the first row and more than the
second.

By this method of construction, comparatively good ventilation can be
obtained for the first row of cottages, and the third row is no worse off
than in the former method.  The middle row, on the other hand, is at
least as badly ventilated as the houses in the courts, and the back
street is always in the same filthy, disgusting condition as they.  The
contractors prefer this method because it saves them space, and furnishes
the means of fleecing better paid workers through the higher rents of the
cottages in the first and third rows.  These three different forms of
cottage building are found all over Manchester and throughout Lancashire
and Yorkshire, often mixed up together, but usually separate enough to
indicate the relative age of parts of towns.  The third system, that of
the back alleys, prevails largely in the great working-men's district
east of St. George's Road and Ancoats Street, and is the one most often
found in the other working-men's quarters of Manchester and its suburbs.

In the last-mentioned broad district included under the name Ancoats,
stand the largest mills of Manchester lining the canals, colossal six and
seven-storied buildings towering with their slender chimneys far above
the low cottages of the workers.  The population of the district
consists, therefore, chiefly of mill hands, and in the worst streets, of
hand-weavers.  The streets nearest the heart of the town are the oldest,
and consequently the worst; they are, however, paved, and supplied with
drains.  Among them I include those nearest to and parallel with Oldham
Road and Great Ancoats Street.  Farther to the north-east lie many newly-
built-up streets; here the cottages look neat and cleanly, doors and
windows are new and freshly painted, the rooms within newly whitewashed;
the streets themselves are better aired, the vacant building lots between
them larger and more numerous.  But this can be said of a minority of the
houses only, while cellar dwellings are to be found under almost every
cottage; many streets are unpaved and without sewers; and, worse than
all, this neat appearance is all pretence, a pretence which vanishes
within the first ten years.  For the construction of the cottages
individually is no less to be condemned than the plan of the streets.  All
such cottages look neat and substantial at first; their massive brick
walls deceive the eye, and, on passing through a _newly-built_ working-
men's street, without remembering the back alleys and the construction of
the houses themselves, one is inclined to agree with the assertion of the
Liberal manufacturers that the working population is nowhere so well
housed as in England.  But on closer examination, it becomes evident that
the walls of these cottages are as thin as it is possible to make them.
The outer walls, those of the cellar, which bear the weight of the ground
floor and roof, are one whole brick thick at most, the bricks lying with
their long sides touching; but I have seen many a cottage of the same
height, some in process of building, whose outer walls were but one-half
brick thick, the bricks lying not sidewise but lengthwise, their narrow
ends touching.  The object of this is to spare material, but there is
also another reason for it; namely, the fact that the contractors never
own the land but lease it, according to the English custom, for twenty,
thirty, forty, fifty, or ninety-nine years, at the expiration of which
time it falls, with everything upon it, back into the possession of the
original holder, who pays nothing in return for improvements upon it.  The
improvements are therefore so calculated by the lessee as to be worth as
little as possible at the expiration of the stipulated term.  And as such
cottages are often built but twenty or thirty years before the expiration
of the term, it may easily be imagined that the contractors make no
unnecessary expenditures upon them.  Moreover, these contractors, usually
carpenters and builders, or manufacturers, spend little or nothing in
repairs, partly to avoid diminishing their rent receipts, and partly in
view of the approaching surrender of the improvement to the landowner;
while in consequence of commercial crises and the loss of work that
follows them, whole streets often stand empty, the cottages falling
rapidly into ruin and uninhabitableness.  It is calculated in general
that working-men's cottages last only forty years on the average.  This
sounds strangely enough when one sees the beautiful, massive walls of
newly-built ones, which seem to give promise of lasting a couple of
centuries; but the fact remains that the niggardliness of the original
expenditure, the neglect of all repairs, the frequent periods of
emptiness, the constant change of inhabitants, and the destruction
carried on by the dwellers during the final ten years, usually Irish
families, who do not hesitate to use the wooden portions for
fire-wood--all this, taken together, accomplishes the complete ruin of
the cottages by the end of forty years.  Hence it comes that Ancoats,
built chiefly since the sudden growth of manufacture, chiefly indeed
within the present century, contains a vast number of ruinous houses,
most of them being, in fact, in the last stages of inhabitableness.  I
will not dwell upon the amount of capital thus wasted, the small
additional expenditure upon the original improvement and upon repairs
which would suffice to keep this whole district clean, decent, and
inhabitable for years together.  I have to deal here with the state of
the houses and their inhabitants, and it must be admitted that no more
injurious and demoralising method of housing the workers has yet been
discovered than precisely this.  The working-man is constrained to occupy
such ruinous dwellings because he cannot pay for others, and because
there are no others in the vicinity of his mill; perhaps, too, because
they belong to the employer, who engages him only on condition of his
taking such a cottage.  The calculation with reference to the forty
years' duration of the cottage is, of course, not always perfectly
strict; for, if the dwellings are in a thickly-built-up portion of the
town, and there is a good prospect of finding steady occupants for them,
while the ground rent is high, the contractors do a little something to
keep the cottages inhabitable after the expiration of the forty years.
They never do anything more, however, than is absolutely unavoidable, and
the dwellings so repaired are the worst of all.  Occasionally when an
epidemic threatens, the otherwise sleepy conscience of the sanitary
police is a little stirred, raids are made into the working-men's
districts, whole rows of cellars and cottages are closed, as happened in
the case of several lanes near Oldham Road; but this does not last long:
the condemned cottages soon find occupants again, the owners are much
better off by letting them, and the sanitary police won't come again so
soon.  These east and north-east sides of Manchester are the only ones on
which the bourgeoisie has not built, because ten or eleven months of the
year the west and south-west wind drives the smoke of all the factories
hither, and that the working-people alone may breathe.

Southward from Great Ancoats Street, lies a great, straggling, working-
men's quarter, a hilly, barren stretch of land, occupied by detached,
irregularly built rows of houses or squares, between these, empty
building lots, uneven, clayey, without grass and scarcely passable in wet
weather.  The cottages are all filthy and old, and recall the New Town to
mind.  The stretch cut through by the Birmingham railway is the most
thickly built-up and the worst.  Here flows the Medlock with countless
windings through a valley, which is, in places, on a level with the
valley of the Irk.  Along both sides of the stream, which is coal black,
stagnant and foul, stretches a broad belt of factories and working-men's
dwellings, the latter all in the worst condition.  The bank is chiefly
declivitous and is built over to the water's edge, just as we saw along
the Irk; while the houses are equally bad, whether built on the
Manchester side or in Ardwick, Chorlton, or Hulme.  But the most horrible
spot (if I should describe all the separate spots in detail I should
never come to the end) lies on the Manchester side, immediately south-
west of Oxford Road, and is known as Little Ireland.  In a rather deep
hole, in a curve of the Medlock and surrounded on all four sides by tall
factories and high embankments, covered with buildings, stand two groups
of about two hundred cottages, built chiefly back to back, in which live
about four thousand human beings, most of them Irish.  The cottages are
old, dirty, and of the smallest sort, the streets uneven, fallen into
ruts and in part without drains or pavement; masses of refuse, offal and
sickening filth lie among standing pools in all directions; the
atmosphere is poisoned by the effluvia from these, and laden and darkened
by the smoke of a dozen tall factory chimneys.  A horde of ragged women
and children swarm about here, as filthy as the swine that thrive upon
the garbage heaps and in the puddles.  In short, the whole rookery
furnishes such a hateful and repulsive spectacle as can hardly be
equalled in the worst court on the Irk.  The race that lives in these
ruinous cottages, behind broken windows, mended with oilskin, sprung
doors, and rotten door-posts, or in dark, wet cellars, in measureless
filth and stench, in this atmosphere penned in as if with a purpose, this
race must really have reached the lowest stage of humanity.  This is the
impression and the line of thought which the exterior of this district
forces upon the beholder.  But what must one think when he hears that in
each of these pens, containing at most two rooms, a garret and perhaps a
cellar, on the average twenty human beings live; that in the whole
region, for each one hundred and twenty persons, one usually inaccessible
privy is provided; and that in spite of all the preachings of the
physicians, in spite of the excitement into which the cholera epidemic
plunged the sanitary police by reason of the condition of Little Ireland,
in spite of everything, in this year of grace 1844, it is in almost the
same state as in 1831!  Dr. Kay asserts that not only the cellars but the
first floors of all the houses in this district are damp; that a number
of cellars once filled up with earth have now been emptied and are
occupied once more by Irish people; that in one cellar the water
constantly wells up through a hole stopped with clay, the cellar lying
below the river level, so that its occupant, a hand-loom weaver, had to
bale out the water from his dwelling every morning and pour it into the
street!

Farther down, on the left side of the Medlock, lies Hulme, which,
properly speaking, is one great working-people's district, the condition
of which coincides almost exactly with that of Ancoats; the more thickly
built-up regions chiefly bad and approaching ruin, the less populous of
more modern structure, but generally sunk in filth.  On the other side of
the Medlock, in Manchester proper, lies a second great working-men's
district which stretches on both sides of Deansgate as far as the
business quarter, and in certain parts rivals the Old Town.  Especially
in the immediate vicinity of the business quarter, between Bridge and
Quay Streets, Princess and Peter Streets, the crowded construction
exceeds in places the narrowest courts of the Old Town.  Here are long,
narrow lanes between which run contracted, crooked courts and passages,
the entrances to which are so irregular that the explorer is caught in a
blind alley at every few steps, or comes out where he least expects to,
unless he knows every court and every alley exactly and separately.
According to Dr. Kay, the most demoralised class of all Manchester lived
in these ruinous and filthy districts, people whose occupations are
thieving and prostitution; and, to all appearance, his assertion is still
true at the present moment.  When the sanitary police made its expedition
hither in 1831, it found the uncleanness as great as in Little Ireland or
along the Irk (that it is not much better to-day, I can testify); and
among other items, they found in Parliament Street for three hundred and
eighty persons, and in Parliament Passage for thirty thickly populated
houses, but a single privy.

If we cross the Irwell to Salford, we find on a peninsula formed by the
river, a town of eighty thousand inhabitants, which, properly speaking,
is one large working-men's quarter, penetrated by a single wide avenue.
Salford, once more important than Manchester, was then the leading town
of the surrounding district to which it still gives its name, Salford
Hundred.  Hence it is that an old and therefore very unwholesome, dirty,
and ruinous locality is to be found here, lying opposite the Old Church
of Manchester, and in as bad a condition as the Old Town on the other
side of the Irwell.  Farther away from the river lies the newer portion,
which is, however, already beyond the limit of its forty years of cottage
life, and therefore ruinous enough.  All Salford is built in courts or
narrow lanes, so narrow, that they remind me of the narrowest I have ever
seen, the little lanes of Genoa.  The average construction of Salford is
in this respect much worse than that of Manchester, and so, too, in
respect to cleanliness.  If, in Manchester, the police, from time to
time, every six or ten years, makes a raid upon the working-people's
districts, closes the worst dwellings, and causes the filthiest spots in
these Augean stables to be cleansed, in Salford it seems to have done
absolutely nothing.  The narrow side lanes and courts of Chapel Street,
Greengate, and Gravel Lane have certainly never been cleansed since they
were built.  Of late, the Liverpool railway has been carried through the
middle of them, over a high viaduct, and has abolished many of the
filthiest nooks; but what does that avail?  Whoever passes over this
viaduct and looks down, sees filth and wretchedness enough; and, if any
one takes the trouble to pass through these lanes, and glance through the
open doors and windows into the houses and cellars, he can convince
himself afresh with every step that the workers of Salford live in
dwellings in which cleanliness and comfort are impossible.  Exactly the
same state of affairs is found in the more distant regions of Salford, in
Islington, along Regent Road, and back of the Bolton railway.  The
working-men's dwellings between Oldfield Road and Cross Lane, where a
mass of courts and alleys are to be found in the worst possible state,
vie with the dwellings of the Old Town in filth and overcrowding.  In
this district I found a man, apparently about sixty years old, living in
a cow stable.  He had constructed a sort of chimney for his square pen,
which had neither windows, floor, nor ceiling, had obtained a bedstead
and lived there, though the rain dripped through his rotten roof.  This
man was too old and weak for regular work, and supported himself by
removing manure with a hand-cart; the dung-heaps lay next door to his
palace!

Such are the various working-people's quarters of Manchester as I had
occasion to observe them personally during twenty months.  If we briefly
formulate the result of our wanderings, we must admit that 350,000
working-people of Manchester and its environs live, almost all of them,
in wretched, damp, filthy cottages, that the streets which surround them
are usually in the most miserable and filthy condition, laid out without
the slightest reference to ventilation, with reference solely to the
profit secured by the contractor.  In a word, we must confess that in the
working-men's dwellings of Manchester, no cleanliness, no convenience,
and consequently no comfortable family life is possible; that in such
dwellings only a physically degenerate race, robbed of all humanity,
degraded, reduced morally and physically to bestiality, could feel
comfortable and at home.  And I am not alone in making this assertion.  We
have seen that Dr. Kay gives precisely the same description; and, though
it is superfluous, I quote further the words of a Liberal, {63}
recognised and highly valued as an authority by the manufacturers, and a
fanatical opponent of all independent movements of the workers:

"As I passed through the dwellings of the mill hands in Irish Town,
Ancoats, and Little Ireland, I was only amazed that it is possible to
maintain a reasonable state of health in such homes.  These towns, for in
extent and number of inhabitants they are towns, have been erected with
the utmost disregard of everything except the immediate advantage of the
speculating builder.  A carpenter and builder unite to buy a series of
building sites (_i.e_., they lease them for a number of years), and cover
them with so-called houses.  In one place we found a whole street
following the course of a ditch, because in this way deeper cellars could
be secured without the cost of digging, cellars not for storing wares or
rubbish, but for dwellings for human beings.  _Not one house of this
street escaped the cholera_.  In general, the streets of these suburbs
are unpaved, with a dung-heap or ditch in the middle; the houses are
built back to back, without ventilation or drainage, and whole families
are limited to a corner of a cellar or a garret."  I have already
referred to the unusual activity which the sanitary police manifested
during the cholera visitation.  When the epidemic was approaching, a
universal terror seized the bourgeoisie of the city.  People remembered
the unwholesome dwellings of the poor, and trembled before the certainty
that each of these slums would become a centre for the plague, whence it
would spread desolation in all directions through the houses of the
propertied class.  A Health Commission was appointed at once to
investigate these districts, and report upon their condition to the Town
Council.  Dr. Kay, himself a member of this Commission, who visited in
person every separate police district except one, the eleventh, quotes
extracts from their reports: There were inspected, in all, 6,951
houses--naturally in Manchester proper alone, Salford and the other
suburbs being excluded.  Of these, 6,565 urgently needed whitewashing
within; 960 were out of repair; 939 had insufficient drains; 1,435 were
damp; 452 were badly ventilated; 2,221 were without privies.  Of the 687
streets inspected, 248 were unpaved, 53 but partially paved, 112
ill-ventilated, 352 containing standing pools, heaps of debris, refuse,
etc.  To cleanse such an Augean stable before the arrival of the cholera
was, of course, out of the question.  A few of the worst nooks were
therefore cleansed, and everything else left as before.  In the cleansed
spots, as Little Ireland proves, the old filthy condition was naturally
restored in a couple of months.  As to the internal condition of these
houses, the same Commission reports a state of things similar to that
which we have already met with in London, Edinburgh, and other cities.
{64}

It often happens that a whole Irish family is crowded into one bed; often
a heap of filthy straw or quilts of old sacking cover all in an
indiscriminate heap, where all alike are degraded by want, stolidity, and
wretchedness.  Often the inspectors found, in a single house, two
families in two rooms.  All slept in one, and used the other as a kitchen
and dining-room in common.  Often more than one family lived in a single
damp cellar, in whose pestilent atmosphere twelve to sixteen persons were
crowded together.  To these and other sources of disease must be added
that pigs were kept, and other disgusting things of the most revolting
kind were found.

We must add that many families, who had but one room for themselves,
receive boarders and lodgers in it, that such lodgers of both sexes by no
means rarely sleep in the same bed with the married couple; and that the
single case of a man and his wife and his adult sister-in-law sleeping in
one bed was found, according to the "Report concerning the sanitary
condition of the working-class," six times repeated in Manchester.  Common
lodging-houses, too, are very numerous; Dr. Kay gives their number in
1831 at 267 in Manchester proper, and they must have increased greatly
since then.  Each of these receives from twenty to thirty guests, so that
they shelter all told, nightly, from five to seven thousand human beings.
The character of the houses and their guests is the same as in other
cities.  Five to seven beds in each room lie on the floor--without
bedsteads, and on these sleep, mixed indiscriminately, as many persons as
apply.  What physical and moral atmosphere reigns in these holes I need
not state.  Each of these houses is a focus of crime, the scene of deeds
against which human nature revolts, which would perhaps never have been
executed but for this forced centralisation of vice. {65}  Gaskell gives
the number of persons living in cellars in Manchester proper as 20,000.
The _Weekly Dispatch_ gives the number, "according to official reports,"
as twelve per cent. of the working-class, which agrees with Gaskell's
number; the workers being estimated at 175,000, 21,000 would form twelve
per cent. of it.  The cellar dwellings in the suburbs are at least as
numerous, so that the number of persons living in cellars in
Manchester--using its name in the broader sense--is not less than forty
to fifty thousand.  So much for the dwellings of the workers in the
largest cities and towns.  The manner in which the need of a shelter is
satisfied furnishes a standard for the manner in which all other
necessities are supplied.  That in these filthy holes a ragged, ill-fed
population alone can dwell is a safe conclusion, and such is the fact.
The clothing of the working-people, in the majority of cases, is in a
very bad condition.  The material used for it is not of the best adapted.
Wool and linen have almost vanished from the wardrobe of both sexes, and
cotton has taken their place.  Shirts are made of bleached or coloured
cotton goods; the dresses of the women are chiefly of cotton print goods,
and woollen petticoats are rarely to be seen on the washline.  The men
wear chiefly trousers of fustian or other heavy cotton goods, and jackets
or coats of the same.  Fustian has become the proverbial costume of the
working-men, who are called "fustian jackets," and call themselves so in
contrast to the gentlemen who wear broadcloth, which latter words are
used as characteristic for the middle-class.  When Feargus O'Connor, the
Chartist leader, came to Manchester during the insurrection of 1842, he
appeared, amidst the deafening applause of the working-men, in a fustian
suit of clothing.  Hats are the universal head-covering in England, even
for working-men, hats of the most diverse forms, round, high,
broad-brimmed, narrow-brimmed, or without brims--only the younger men in
factory towns wearing caps.  Any one who does not own a hat folds himself
a low, square paper cap.

The whole clothing of the working-class, even assuming it to be in good
condition, is little adapted to the climate.  The damp air of England,
with its sudden changes of temperature, more calculated than any other to
give rise to colds, obliges almost the whole middle-class to wear flannel
next the skin, about the body, and flannel scarfs and shirts are in
almost universal use.  Not only is the working-class deprived of this
precaution, it is scarcely ever in a position to use a thread of woollen
clothing; and the heavy cotton goods, though thicker, stiffer, and
heavier than woollen clothes, afford much less protection against cold
and wet, remain damp much longer because of their thickness and the
nature of the stuff, and have nothing of the compact density of fulled
woollen cloths.  And, if a working-man once buys himself a woollen coat
for Sunday, he must get it from one of the cheap shops where he finds
bad, so-called "Devil's-dust" cloth, manufactured for sale and not for
use, and liable to tear or grow threadbare in a fortnight, or he must buy
of an old clothes'-dealer a half-worn coat which has seen its best days,
and lasts but a few weeks.  Moreover, the working-man's clothing is, in
most cases, in bad condition, and there is the oft-recurring necessity
for placing the best pieces in the pawnbroker's shop.  But among very
large numbers, especially among the Irish, the prevailing clothing
consists of perfect rags often beyond all mending, or so patched that the
original colour can no longer be detected.  Yet the English and Anglo-
Irish go on patching, and have carried this art to a remarkable pitch,
putting wool or bagging on fustian, or the reverse--it's all the same to
them.  But the true, transplanted Irish hardly ever patch except in the
extremest necessity, when the garment would otherwise fall apart.
Ordinarily the rags of the shirt protrude through the rents in the coat
or trousers.  They wear, as Thomas Carlyle says,--{67}

   "A suit of tatters, the getting on or off which is said to be a
   difficult operation, transacted only in festivals and the high tides
   of the calendar."

The Irish have introduced, too, the custom previously unknown in England,
of going barefoot.  In every manufacturing town there is now to be seen a
multitude of people, especially women and children, going about barefoot,
and their example is gradually being adopted by the poorer English.

As with clothing, so with food.  The workers get what is too bad for the
property-holding class.  In the great towns of England everything may be
had of the best, but it costs money; and the workman, who must keep house
on a couple of pence, cannot afford much expense.  Moreover, he usually
receives his wages on Saturday evening, for, although a beginning has
been made in the payment of wages on Friday, this excellent arrangement
is by no means universal; and so he comes to market at five or even seven
o'clock, while the buyers of the middle-class have had the first choice
during the morning, when the market teems with the best of everything.
But when the workers reach it, the best has vanished, and, if it was
still there, they would probably not be able to buy it.  The potatoes
which the workers buy are usually poor, the vegetables wilted, the cheese
old and of poor quality, the bacon rancid, the meat lean, tough, taken
from old, often diseased, cattle, or such as have died a natural death,
and not fresh even then, often half decayed.  The sellers are usually
small hucksters who buy up inferior goods, and can sell them cheaply by
reason of their badness.  The poorest workers are forced to use still
another device to get together the things they need with their few pence.
As nothing can be sold on Sunday, and all shops must be closed at twelve
o'clock on Saturday night, such things as would not keep until Monday are
sold at any price between ten o'clock and midnight.  But nine-tenths of
what is sold at ten o'clock is past using by Sunday morning, yet these
are precisely the provisions which make up the Sunday dinner of the
poorest class.  The meat which the workers buy is very often past using;
but having bought it, they must eat it.  On the 6th of January, 1844 (if
I am not greatly mistaken), a court leet was held in Manchester, when
eleven meat-sellers were fined for having sold tainted meat.  Each of
them had a whole ox or pig, or several sheep, or from fifty to sixty
pounds of meat, which were all confiscated in a tainted condition.  In
one case, sixty-four stuffed Christmas geese were seized which had proved
unsaleable in Liverpool, and had been forwarded to Manchester, where they
were brought to market foul and rotten.  All the particulars, with names
and fines, were published at the time in the _Manchester Guardian_.  In
the six weeks, from July 1st to August 14th, the same sheet reported
three similar cases.  According to the _Guardian_ for August 3rd, a pig,
weighing 200 pounds, which had been found dead and decayed, was cut up
and exposed for sale by a butcher at Heywood, and was then seized.
According to the number for July 31st, two butchers at Wigan, of whom one
had previously been convicted of the same offence, were fined 2 and 4
pounds respectively, for exposing tainted meat for sale; and, according
to the number for August 10th, twenty-six tainted hams seized at a
dealer's in Bolton, were publicly burnt, and the dealer fined twenty
shillings.  But these are by no means all the cases; they do not even
form a fair average for a period of six weeks, according to which to form
an average for the year.  There are often seasons in which every number
of the semi-weekly _Guardian_ mentions a similar case found in Manchester
or its vicinity.  And when one reflects upon the many cases which must
escape detection in the extensive markets that stretch along the front of
every main street, under the slender supervision of the market
inspectors--and how else can one explain the boldness with which whole
animals are exposed for sale?--when one considers how great the
temptation must be, in view of the incomprehensibly small fines mentioned
in the foregoing cases; when one reflects what condition a piece of meat
must have reached to be seized by the inspectors, it is impossible to
believe that the workers obtain good and nourishing meat as a usual
thing.  But they are victimised in yet another way by the money-greed of
the middle-class.  Dealers and manufacturers adulterate all kinds of
provisions in an atrocious manner, and without the slightest regard to
the health of the consumers.  We have heard the _Manchester Guardian_
upon this subject, let us hear another organ of the middle-class--I
delight in the testimony of my opponents--let us hear the _Liverpool
Mercury_: "Salted butter is sold for fresh, the lumps being covered with
a coating of fresh butter, or a pound of fresh being laid on top to
taste, while the salted article is sold after this test, or the whole
mass is washed and then sold as fresh.  With sugar, pounded rice and
other cheap adulterating materials are mixed, and the whole sold at full
price.  The refuse of soap-boiling establishments also is mixed with
other things and sold as sugar.  Chicory and other cheap stuff is mixed
with ground coffee, and artificial coffee beans with the unground
article.  Cocoa is often adulterated with fine brown earth, treated with
fat to render it more easily mistakable for real cocoa.  Tea is mixed
with the leaves of the sloe and with other refuse, or dry tea-leaves are
roasted on hot copper plates, so returning to the proper colour and being
sold as fresh.  Pepper is mixed with pounded nutshells; port wine is
manufactured outright (out of alcohol, dye-stuffs, etc.), while it is
notorious that more of it is consumed in England alone than is grown in
Portugal; and tobacco is mixed with disgusting substances of all sorts
and in all possible forms in which the article is produced."  I can add
that several of the most respected tobacco dealers in Manchester
announced publicly last summer, that, by reason of the universal
adulteration of tobacco, no firm could carry on business without
adulteration, and that no cigar costing less than threepence is made
wholly from tobacco.  These frauds are naturally not restricted to
articles of food, though I could mention a dozen more, the villainy of
mixing gypsum or chalk with flour among them.  Fraud is practiced in the
sale of articles of every sort: flannel, stockings, etc., are stretched,
and shrink after the first washing; narrow cloth is sold as being from
one and a half to three inches broader than it actually is; stoneware is
so thinly glazed that the glazing is good for nothing, and cracks at
once, and a hundred other rascalities, _tout comme chez nous_.  But the
lion's share of the evil results of these frauds falls to the workers.
The rich are less deceived, because they can pay the high prices of the
large shops which have a reputation to lose, and would injure themselves
more than their customers if they kept poor or adulterated wares; the
rich are spoiled, too, by habitual good eating, and detect adulteration
more easily with their sensitive palates.  But the poor, the
working-people, to whom a couple of farthings are important, who must buy
many things with little money, who cannot afford to inquire too closely
into the quality of their purchases, and cannot do so in any case because
they have had no opportunity of cultivating their taste--to their share
fall all the adulterated, poisoned provisions.  They must deal with the
small retailers, must buy perhaps on credit, and these small retail
dealers who cannot sell even the same quality of goods so cheaply as the
largest retailers, because of their small capital and the large
proportional expenses of their business, must knowingly or unknowingly
buy adulterated goods in order to sell at the lower prices required, and
to meet the competition of the others.  Further, a large retail dealer
who has extensive capital invested in his business is ruined with his
ruined credit if detected in a fraudulent practice; but what harm does it
do a small grocer, who has customers in a single street only, if frauds
are proved against him?  If no one trusts him in Ancoats, he moves to
Chorlton or Hulme, where no one knows him, and where he continues to
defraud as before; while legal penalties attach to very few adulterations
unless they involve revenue frauds.  Not in the quality alone, but in the
quantity of his goods as well, is the English working-man defrauded.  The
small dealers usually have false weights and measures, and an incredible
number of convictions for such offences may be read in the police
reports.  How universal this form of fraud is in the manufacturing
districts, a couple of extracts from the _Manchester Guardian_ may serve
to show.  They cover only a short period, and, even here, I have not all
the numbers at hand

And the same causes which make the working-class the chief sufferers from
frauds in the quality of goods make them the usual victims of frauds in
the question of quantity too.

The habitual food of the individual working-man naturally varies
according to his wages.  The better paid workers, especially those in
whose families every member is able to earn something, have good food as
long as this state of things lasts; meat daily, and bacon and cheese for
supper.  Where wages are less, meat is used only two or three times a
week, and the proportion of bread and potatoes increases.  Descending
gradually, we find the animal food reduced to a small piece of bacon cut
up with the potatoes; lower still, even this disappears, and there remain
only bread, cheese, porridge, and potatoes, until on the lowest round of
the ladder, among the Irish, potatoes form the sole food.  As an
accompaniment, weak tea, with perhaps a little sugar, milk, or spirits,
is universally drunk.  Tea is regarded in England, and even in Ireland,
as quite as indispensable as coffee in Germany, and where no tea is used,
the bitterest poverty reigns.  But all this pre-supposes that the workman
has work.  When he has none, he is wholly at the mercy of accident, and
eats what is given him, what he can beg or steal.  And, if he gets
nothing, he simply starves, as we have seen.  The quantity of food
varies, of course, like its quality, according to the rate of wages, so
that among ill-paid workers, even if they have no large families, hunger
prevails in spite of full and regular work; and the number of the ill-
paid is very large.  Especially in London, where the competition of the
workers rises with the increase of population, this class is very
numerous, but it is to be found in other towns as well.  In these cases
all sorts of devices are used; potato parings, vegetable refuse, and
rotten vegetables are eaten for want of other food, and everything
greedily gathered up which may possibly contain an atom of nourishment.
And, if the week's wages are used up before the end of the week, it often
enough happens that in the closing days the family gets only as much
food, if any, as is barely sufficient to keep off starvation.  Of course
such a way of living unavoidably engenders a multitude of diseases, and
when these appear, when the father from whose work the family is chiefly
supported, whose physical exertion most demands nourishment, and who
therefore first succumbs--when the father is utterly disabled, then
misery reaches its height, and then the brutality with which society
abandons its members, just when their need is greatest, comes out fully
into the light of day.

To sum up briefly the facts thus far cited.  The great towns are chiefly
inhabited by working-people, since in the best case there is one
bourgeois for two workers, often for three, here and there for four;
these workers have no property whatsoever of their own, and live wholly
upon wages, which usually go from hand to mouth.  Society, composed
wholly of atoms, does not trouble itself about them; leaves them to care
for themselves and their families, yet supplies them no means of doing
this in an efficient and permanent manner.  Every working-man, even the
best, is therefore constantly exposed to loss of work and food, that is
to death by starvation, and many perish in this way.  The dwellings of
the workers are everywhere badly planned, badly built, and kept in the
worst condition, badly ventilated, damp, and unwholesome.  The
inhabitants are confined to the smallest possible space, and at least one
family usually sleeps in each room.  The interior arrangement of the
dwellings is poverty-stricken in various degrees, down to the utter
absence of even the most necessary furniture.  The clothing of the
workers, too, is generally scanty, and that of great multitudes is in
rags.  The food is, in general, bad; often almost unfit for use, and in
many cases, at least at times, insufficient in quantity, so that, in
extreme cases, death by starvation results.  Thus the working-class of
the great cities offers a graduated scale of conditions in life, in the
best cases a temporarily endurable existence for hard work and good
wages, good and endurable, that is, from the worker's standpoint; in the
worst cases, bitter want, reaching even homelessness and death by
starvation.  The average is much nearer the worst case than the best.  And
this series does not fall into fixed classes, so that one can say, this
fraction of the working-class is well off, has always been so, and
remains so.  If that is the case here and there, if single branches of
work have in general an advantage over others, yet the condition of the
workers in each branch is subject to such great fluctuations that a
single working-man may be so placed as to pass through the whole range
from comparative comfort to the extremest need, even to death by
starvation, while almost every English working-man can tell a tale of
marked changes of fortune.  Let us examine the causes of this somewhat
more closely.




COMPETITION.


We have seen in the introduction how competition created the proletariat
at the very beginning of the industrial movement, by increasing the wages
of weavers in consequence of the increased demand for woven goods, so
inducing the weaving peasants to abandon their farms and earn more money
by devoting themselves to their looms.  We have seen how it crowded out
the small farmers by means of the large farm system, reduced them to the
rank of proletarians, and attracted them in part into the towns; how it
further ruined the small bourgeoisie in great measure and reduced its
members also to the ranks of the proletariat; how it centralised capital
in the hands of the few, and population in the great towns.  Such are the
various ways and means by which competition, as it reached its full
manifestation and free development in modern industry, created and
extended the proletariat.  We shall now have to observe its influence on
the working-class already created.  And here we must begin by tracing the
results of competition of single workers with one another.

Competition is the completest expression of the battle of all against all
which rules in modern civil society.  This battle, a battle for life, for
existence, for everything, in case of need a battle of life and death, is
fought not between the different classes of society only, but also
between the individual members of these classes.  Each is in the way of
the other, and each seeks to crowd out all who are in his way, and to put
himself in their place.  The workers are in constant competition among
themselves as the members of the bourgeoisie among themselves.  The power-
loom weaver is in competition with the hand-loom weaver, the unemployed
or ill-paid hand-loom weaver with him who has work or is better paid,
each trying to supplant the other.  But this competition of the workers
among themselves is the worst side of the present state of things in its
effect upon the worker, the sharpest weapon against the proletariat in
the hands of the bourgeoisie.  Hence the effort of the workers to nullify
this competition by associations, hence the hatred of the bourgeoisie
towards these associations, and its triumph in every defeat which befalls
them.

The proletarian is helpless; left to himself, he cannot live a single
day.  The bourgeoisie has gained a monopoly of all means of existence in
the broadest sense of the word.  What the proletarian needs, he can
obtain only from this bourgeoisie, which is protected in its monopoly by
the power of the State.  The proletarian is, therefore, in law and in
fact, the slave of the bourgeoisie, which can decree his life or death.
It offers him the means of living, but only for an "equivalent" for his
work.  It even lets him have the appearance of acting from a free choice,
of making a contract with free, unconstrained consent, as a responsible
agent who has attained his majority.

Fine freedom, where the proletarian has no other choice than that of
either accepting the conditions which the bourgeoisie offers him, or of
starving, of freezing to death, of sleeping naked among the beasts of the
forests!  A fine "equivalent" valued at pleasure by the bourgeoisie!  And
if one proletarian is such a fool as to starve rather than agree to the
equitable propositions of the bourgeoisie, his "natural superiors,"
another is easily found in his place; there are proletarians enough in
the world, and not all so insane as to prefer dying to living.

Here we have the competition of the workers among themselves.  If _all_
the proletarians announced their determination to starve rather than work
for the bourgeoisie, the latter would have to surrender its monopoly.  But
this is not the case--is, indeed, a rather impossible case--so that the
bourgeoisie still thrives.  To this competition of the worker there is
but one limit; no worker will work for less than he needs to subsist.  If
he must starve, he will prefer to starve in idleness rather than in toil.
True, this limit is relative; one needs more than another, one is
accustomed to more comfort than another; the Englishman who is still
somewhat civilised, needs more than the Irishman who goes in rags, eats
potatoes, and sleeps in a pig-sty.  But that does not hinder the
Irishman's competing with the Englishman, and gradually forcing the rate
of wages, and with it the Englishman's level of civilisation, down to the
Irishman's level.  Certain kinds of work require a certain grade of
civilisation, and to these belong almost all forms of industrial
occupation; hence the interest of the bourgeoisie requires in this case
that wages should be high enough to enable the workman to keep himself
upon the required plane.

The newly immigrated Irishman, encamped in the first stable that offers,
or turned out in the street after a week because he spends everything
upon drink and cannot pay rent, would be a poor mill-hand.  The mill-hand
must, therefore, have wages enough to enable him to bring up his children
to regular work; but no more, lest he should be able to get on without
the wages of his children, and so make something else of them than mere
working-men.  Here, too, the limit, the minimum wage, is relative.  When
every member of the family works, the individual worker can get on with
proportionately less, and the bourgeoisie has made the most of the
opportunity of employing and making profitable the labour of women and
children afforded by machine-work.  Of course it is not in every family
that every member can be set to work, and those in which the case is
otherwise would be in a bad way if obliged to exist upon the minimum wage
possible to a wholly employed family.  Hence the usual wages form an
average according to which a fully employed family gets on pretty well,
and one which embraces few members able to work, pretty badly.  But in
the worst case, every working-man prefers surrendering the trifling
luxury to which he was accustomed to not living at all; prefers a pig-pen
to no roof, wears rags in preference to going naked, confines himself to
a potato diet in preference to starvation.  He contents himself with half-
pay and the hope of better times rather than be driven into the street to
perish before the eyes of the world, as so many have done who had no work
whatever.  This trifle, therefore, this something more than nothing, is
the minimum of wages.  And if there are more workers at hand than the
bourgeoisie thinks well to employ--if at the end of the battle of
competition there yet remain workers who find nothing to do, they must
simply starve; for the bourgeois will hardly give them work if he cannot
sell the produce of their labour at a profit.

From this it is evident what the minimum of wages is.  The maximum is
determined by the competition of the bourgeoisie among themselves; for we
have seen how they, too, must compete with each other.  The bourgeois can
increase his capital only in commerce and manufacture, and in both cases
he needs workers.  Even if he invests his capital at interest, he needs
them indirectly; for without commerce and manufacture, no one would pay
him interest upon his capital, no one could use it.  So the bourgeois
certainly needs workers, not indeed for his immediate living, for at need
he could consume his capital, but as we need an article of trade or a
beast of burden,--as a means of profit.  The proletarian produces the
goods which the bourgeois sells with advantage.  When, therefore, the
demand for these goods increases so that all the competing working-men
are employed, and a few more might perhaps be useful, the competition
among the workers falls away, and the bourgeoisie begin to compete among
themselves.  The capitalist in search of workmen knows very well that his
profits increase as prices rise in consequence of the increased demand
for his goods, and pays a trifle higher wages rather than let the whole
profit escape him.  He sends the butter to fetch the cheese, and getting
the latter, leaves the butter ungrudgingly to the workers.  So one
capitalist after another goes in chase of workers, and wages rise; but
only as high as the increasing demand permits.  If the capitalist, who
willingly sacrificed a part of his extraordinary profit, runs into danger
of sacrificing any part of his ordinary average profit, he takes very
good care not to pay more than average wages.

From this we can determine the average rate of wages.  Under average
circumstances, when neither workers nor capitalists have reason to
compete, especially among themselves, when there are just as many workers
at hand as can be employed in producing precisely the goods that are
demanded, wages stand a little above the minimum.  How far they rise
above the minimum will depend upon the average needs and the grade of
civilisation of the workers.  If the workers are accustomed to eat meat
several times in the week, the capitalists must reconcile themselves to
paying wages enough to make this food attainable, not less, because the
workers are not competing among themselves and have no occasion to
content themselves with less; not more, because the capitalists, in the
absence of competition among themselves, have no occasion to attract
working-men by extraordinary favours.  This standard of the average needs
and the average civilisation of the workers has become very complicated
by reason of the complications of English industry, and is different for
different sorts of workers, as has been pointed out.  Most industrial
occupations demand a certain skill and regularity, and for these
qualities which involve a certain grade of civilisation, the rate of
wages must be such as to induce the worker to acquire such skill and
subject himself to such regularity.  Hence it is that the average wages
of industrial workers are higher than those of mere porters, day
labourers, etc., higher especially than those of agricultural labourers,
a fact to which the additional cost of the necessities of life in cities
contributes somewhat.  In other words, the worker is, in law and in fact,
the slave of the property-holding class, so effectually a slave that he
is sold like a piece of goods, rises and falls in value like a commodity.
If the demand for workers increases, the price of workers rises; if it
falls, their price falls.  If it falls so greatly that a number of them
become unsaleable, if they are left in stock, they are simply left idle;
and as they cannot live upon that, they die of starvation.  For, to speak
in the words of the economists, the expense incurred in maintaining them
would not be reproduced, would be money thrown away, and to this end no
man advances capital; and, so far, Malthus was perfectly right in his
theory of population.  The only difference as compared with the old,
outspoken slavery is this, that the worker of to-day seems to be free
because he is not sold once for all, but piecemeal by the day, the week,
the year, and because no one owner sells him to another, but he is forced
to sell himself in this way instead, being the slave of no particular
person, but of the whole property-holding class.  For him the matter is
unchanged at bottom, and if this semblance of liberty necessarily gives
him some real freedom on the one hand, it entails on the other the
disadvantage that no one guarantees him a subsistence, he is in danger of
being repudiated at any moment by his master, the bourgeoisie, and left
to die of starvation, if the bourgeoisie ceases to have an interest in
his employment, his existence.  The bourgeoisie, on the other hand, is
far better off under the present arrangement than under the old slave
system; it can dismiss its employees at discretion without sacrificing
invested capital, and gets its work done much more cheaply than is
possible with slave labour, as Adam Smith comfortingly pointed out. {80}

Hence it follows, too, that Adam Smith was perfectly right in making the
assertion: "That the demand for men, like that for any other commodity,
necessarily regulates the production of men, quickens it when it goes on
too slowly, and stops it when it advances too fast."  _Just as in the
case of any other commodity_!  If there are too few labourers at hand,
prices, _i.e_. wages, rise, the workers are more prosperous, marriages
multiply, more children are born and more live to grow up, until a
sufficient number of labourers has been secured.  If there are too many
on hand, prices fall, want of work, poverty, and starvation, and
consequent diseases arise, and the "surplus population" is put out of the
way.  And Malthus, who carried the foregoing proposition of Smith
farther, was also right, in his way, in asserting that there are always
more people on hand than can be maintained from the available means of
subsistence.  Surplus population is engendered rather by the competition
of the workers among themselves, which forces each separate worker to
labour as much each day as his strength can possibly admit.  If a
manufacturer can employ ten hands nine hours daily, he can employ nine if
each works ten hours, and the tenth goes hungry.  And if a manufacturer
can force the nine hands to work an extra hour daily for the same wages
by threatening to discharge them at a time when the demand for hands is
not very great, he discharges the tenth and saves so much wages.  This is
the process on a small scale, which goes on in a nation on a large one.
The productiveness of each hand raised to the highest pitch by the
competition of the workers among themselves, the division of labour, the
introduction of machinery, the subjugation of the forces of nature,
deprive a multitude of workers of bread.  These starving workers are then
removed from the market, they can buy nothing, and the quantity of
articles of consumption previously required by them is no longer in
demand, need no longer be produced; the workers previously employed in
producing them are therefore driven out of work, and are also removed
from the market, and so it goes on, always the same old round, or rather,
so it would go if other circumstances did not intervene.  The
introduction of the industrial forces already referred to for increasing
production leads, in the course of time, to a reduction of prices of the
articles produced and to consequent increased consumption, so that a
large part of the displaced workers finally, after long suffering, find
work again.  If, in addition to this, the conquest of foreign markets
constantly and rapidly increases the demand for manufactured goods, as
has been the case in England during the past sixty years, the demand for
hands increases, and, in proportion to it, the population.  Thus, instead
of diminishing, the population of the British Empire has increased with
extraordinary rapidity, and is still increasing.  Yet, in spite of the
extension of industry, in spite of the demand for working-men which, in
general, has increased, there is, according to the confession of all the
official political parties (Tory, Whig, and Radical), permanent surplus,
superfluous population; the competition among the workers is constantly
greater than the competition to secure workers.

Whence comes this incongruity?  It lies in the nature of industrial
competition and the commercial crises which arise from them.  In the
present unregulated production and distribution of the means of
subsistence, which is carried on not directly for the sake of supplying
needs, but for profit, in the system under which every one works for
himself to enrich himself, disturbances inevitably arise at every moment.
For example, England supplies a number of countries with most diverse
goods.  Now, although the manufacturer may know how much of each article
is consumed in each country annually, he cannot know how much is on hand
at every given moment, much less can he know how much his competitors
export thither.  He can only draw most uncertain inferences from the
perpetual fluctuations in prices, as to the quantities on hand and the
needs of the moment.  He must trust to luck in exporting his goods.
Everything is done blindly, as guess-work, more or less at the mercy of
accident.  Upon the slightest favourable report, each one exports what he
can, and before long such a market is glutted, sales stop, capital
remains inactive, prices fall, and English manufacture has no further
employment for its hands.  In the beginning of the development of
manufacture, these checks were limited to single branches and single
markets; but the centralising tendency of competition which drives the
hands thrown out of one branch into such other branches as are most
easily accessible, and transfers the goods which cannot be disposed of in
one market to other markets, has gradually brought the single minor
crises nearer together and united them into one periodically recurring
crisis.  Such a crisis usually recurs once in five years after a brief
period of activity and general prosperity; the home market, like all
foreign ones, is glutted with English goods, which it can only slowly
absorb, the industrial movement comes to a standstill in almost every
branch, the small manufacturers and merchants who cannot survive a
prolonged inactivity of their invested capital fail, the larger ones
suspend business during the worst season, close their mills or work short
time, perhaps half the day; wages fall by reason of the competition of
the unemployed, the diminution of working-time and the lack of profitable
sales; want becomes universal among the workers, the small savings, which
individuals may have made, are rapidly consumed, the philanthropic
institutions are overburdened, the poor-rates are doubled, trebled, and
still insufficient, the number of the starving increases, and the whole
multitude of "surplus" population presses in terrific numbers into the
foreground.  This continues for a time; the "surplus" exist as best they
may, or perish; philanthropy and the Poor Law help many of them to a
painful prolongation of their existence.  Others find scant means of
subsistence here and there in such kinds of work as have been least open
to competition, are most remote from manufacture.  And with how little
can a human being keep body and soul together for a time!  Gradually the
state of things improve; the accumulations of goods are consumed, the
general depression among the men of commerce and manufacture prevents a
too hasty replenishing of the markets, and at last rising prices and
favourable reports from all directions restore activity.  Most of the
markets are distant ones; demand increases and prices rise constantly
while the first exports are arriving; people struggle for the first
goods, the first sales enliven trade still more, the prospective ones
promise still higher prices; expecting a further rise, merchants begin to
buy upon speculation, and so to withdraw from consumption the articles
intended for it, just when they are most needed.  Speculation forces
prices still higher, by inspiring others to purchase, and appropriating
new importations at once.  All this is reported to England, manufacturers
begin to produce with a will, new mills are built, every means is
employed to make the most of the favourable moment.  Speculation arises
here, too, exerting the same influence as upon foreign markets, raising
prices, withdrawing goods from consumption, spurring manufacture in both
ways to the highest pitch of effort.  Then come the daring speculators
working with fictitious capital, living upon credit, ruined if they
cannot speedily sell; they hurl themselves into this universal,
disorderly race for profits, multiply the disorder and haste by their
unbridled passion, which drives prices and production to madness.  It is
a frantic struggle, which carries away even the most experienced and
phlegmatic; goods are spun, woven, hammered, as if all mankind were to be
newly equipped, as though two thousand million new consumers had been
discovered in the moon.  All at once the shaky speculators abroad, who
must have money, begin to sell, below market price, of course, for their
need is urgent; one sale is followed by others, prices fluctuate,
speculators throw their goods upon the market in terror, the market is
disordered, credit shaken, one house after another stops payments,
bankruptcy follows bankruptcy, and the discovery is made that three times
more goods are on hand or under way than can be consumed.  The news
reaches England, where production has been going on at full speed
meanwhile, panic seizes all hands, failures abroad cause others in
England, the panic crushes a number of firms, all reserves are thrown
upon the market here, too, in the moment of anxiety, and the alarm is
still further exaggerated.  This is the beginning of the crisis, which
then takes precisely the same course as its predecessor, and gives place
in turn to a season of prosperity.  So it goes on
perpetually,--prosperity, crisis, prosperity, crisis, and this perennial
round in which English industry moves is, as has been before observed,
usually completed once in five or six years.

From this it is clear that English manufacture must have, at all times
save the brief periods of highest prosperity, an unemployed reserve army
of workers, in order to be able to produce the masses of goods required
by the market in the liveliest months.  This reserve army is larger or
smaller, according as the state of the market occasions the employment of
a larger or smaller proportion of its members.  And if at the moment of
highest activity of the market the agricultural districts and the
branches least affected by the general prosperity temporarily supply to
manufacture a number of workers, these are a mere minority, and these too
belong to the reserve army, with the single difference that the
prosperity of the moment was required to reveal their connection with it.
When they enter upon the more active branches of work, their former
employers draw in somewhat, in order to feel the loss less, work longer
hours, employ women and younger workers, and when the wanderers
discharged at the beginning of the crisis return, they find their places
filled and themselves superfluous--at least in the majority of cases.
This reserve army, which embraces an immense multitude during the crisis
and a large number during the period which may be regarded as the average
between the highest prosperity and the crisis, is the "surplus
population" of England, which keeps body and soul together by begging,
stealing, street-sweeping, collecting manure, pushing handcarts, driving
donkeys, peddling, or performing occasional small jobs.  In every great
town a multitude of such people may be found.  It is astonishing in what
devices this "surplus population" takes refuge.  The London
crossing-sweepers are known all over the world; but hitherto the
principal streets in all the great cities, as well as the crossings, have
been swept by people out of other work, and employed by the Poor Law
guardians or the municipal authorities for the purpose.  Now, however, a
machine has been invented which rattles through the streets daily, and
has spoiled this source of income for the unemployed.  Along the great
highways leading into the cities, on which there is a great deal of
waggon traffic, a large number of people may be seen with small carts,
gathering fresh horse-dung at the risk of their lives among the passing
coaches and omnibuses, often paying a couple of shillings a week to the
authorities for the privilege.  But this occupation is forbidden in many
places, because the ordinary street-sweepings thus impoverished cannot be
sold as manure.  Happy are such of the "surplus" as can obtain a push-
cart and go about with it.  Happier still those to whom it is vouchsafed
to possess an ass in addition to the cart.  The ass must get his own food
or is given a little gathered refuse, and can yet bring in a trifle of
money.  Most of the "surplus" betake themselves to huckstering.  On
Saturday afternoons, especially, when the whole working population is on
the streets, the crowd who live from huckstering and peddling may be
seen.  Shoe and corset laces, braces, twine, cakes, oranges, every kind
of small articles are offered by men, women, and children; and at other
times also, such peddlers are always to be seen standing at the street
corners, or going about with cakes and ginger-beer or nettle-beer.
Matches and such things, sealing-wax, and patent mixtures for lighting
fires are further resources of such venders.  Others, so-called jobbers,
go about the streets seeking small jobs.  Many of these succeed in
getting a day's work, many are not so fortunate.

   "At the gates of all the London docks," says the Rev. W. Champney,
   preacher of the East End, "hundreds of the poor appear every morning
   in winter before daybreak, in the hope of getting a day's work.  They
   await the opening of the gates; and, when the youngest and strongest
   and best known have been engaged, hundreds cast down by disappointed
   hope, go back to their wretched homes."

When these people find no work and will not rebel against society, what
remains for them but to beg?  And surely no one can wonder at the great
army of beggars, most of them able-bodied men, with whom the police
carries on perpetual war.  But the beggary of these men has a peculiar
character.  Such a man usually goes about with his family singing a
pleading song in the streets or appealing, in a speech, to the
benevolence of the passers-by.  And it is a striking fact that these
beggars are seen almost exclusively in the working-people's districts,
that it is almost exclusively the gifts of the poor from which they live.
Or the family takes up its position in a busy street, and without
uttering a word, lets the mere sight of its helplessness plead for it.  In
this case, too, they reckon upon the sympathy of the workers alone, who
know from experience how it feels to be hungry, and are liable to find
themselves in the same situation at any moment; for this dumb, yet most
moving appeal, is met with almost solely in such streets as are
frequented by working-men, and at such hours as working-men pass by; but
especially on summer evenings, when the "secrets" of the working-people's
quarters are generally revealed, and the middle-class withdraws as far as
possible from the district thus polluted.  And he among the "surplus" who
has courage and passion enough openly to resist society, to reply with
declared war upon the bourgeoisie to the disguised war which the
bourgeoisie wages upon him, goes forth to rob, plunder, murder, and burn!

Of this surplus population there are, according to the reports of the
Poor Law commissioners, on an average, a million and a half in England
and Wales; in Scotland the number cannot be ascertained for want of Poor
Law regulations, and with Ireland we shall deal separately.  Moreover,
this million and a half includes only those who actually apply to the
parish for relief; the great multitude who struggle on without recourse
to this most hated expedient, it does not embrace.  On the other hand, a
good part of the number belongs to the agricultural districts, and does
not enter into the present discussion.  During a crisis this number
naturally increases markedly, and want reaches its highest pitch.  Take,
for instance, the crisis of 1842, which, being the latest, was the most
violent; for the intensity of the crisis increases with each repetition,
and the next, which may be expected not later than 1847, {87} will
probably be still more violent and lasting.  During this crisis the poor-
rates rose in every town to a hitherto unknown height.  In Stockport,
among other towns, for every pound paid in house-rent, eight shillings of
poor-rate had to be paid, so that the rate alone formed forty per cent.
of the house-rent.  Moreover, whole streets stood vacant, so that there
were at least twenty thousand fewer inhabitants than usual, and on the
doors of the empty houses might be read: "Stockport to let."  In Bolton,
where, in ordinary years, the rents from which rates are paid average
86,000 pounds, they sank to 36,000 pounds.  The number of the poor to be
supported rose, on the other hand, to 14,000, or more than twenty per
cent. of the whole number of inhabitants.  In Leeds, the Poor Law
guardians had a reserve fund of 10,000 pounds.  This, with a contribution
of 7,000 pounds, was wholly exhausted before the crisis reached its
height.  So it was everywhere.  A report drawn up in January, 1843, by a
committee of the Anti-Corn Law League, on the condition of the industrial
districts in 1842, which was based upon detailed statements of the
manufacturers, asserts that the poor-rate was, taking the average, twice
as high as in 1839, and that the number of persons requiring relief has
trebled, even quintupled, since that time; that a multitude of applicants
belong to a class which had never before solicited relief; that the
working-class commands more than two-thirds less of the means of
subsistence than from 1834-1836; that the consumption of meat had been
decidedly less, in some places twenty per cent., in others reaching sixty
per cent. less; that even handicraftsmen, smiths, bricklayers, and
others, who usually have full employment in the most depressed periods,
now suffered greatly from want of work and reduction of wages; and that,
even now, in January, 1843, wages are still steadily falling.  And these
are the reports of manufacturers!  The starving workmen, whose mills were
idle, whose employers could give them no work, stood in the streets in
all directions, begged singly or in crowds, besieged the sidewalks in
armies, and appealed to the passers-by for help; they begged, not
cringing like ordinary beggars, but threatening by their numbers, their
gestures, and their words.  Such was the state of things in all the
industrial districts, from Leicester to Leeds, and from Manchester to
Birmingham.  Here and there disturbances arose, as in the Staffordshire
potteries, in July.  The most frightful excitement prevailed among the
workers until the general insurrection broke out throughout the
manufacturing districts in August.  When I came to Manchester in
November, 1842, there were crowds of unemployed working-men at every
street corner, and many mills were still standing idle.  In the following
months these unwilling corner loafers gradually vanished, and the
factories came into activity once more.

To what extent want and suffering prevail among these unemployed during
such a crisis, I need not describe.  The poor-rates are insufficient,
vastly insufficient; the philanthropy of the rich is a rain-drop in the
ocean, lost in the moment of falling, beggary can support but few among
the crowds.  If the small dealers did not sell to the working-people on
credit at such times as long as possible--paying themselves liberally
afterwards, it must be confessed--and if the working-people did not help
each other, every crisis would remove a multitude of the surplus through
death by starvation.  Since, however, the most depressed period is brief,
lasting, at worst, but one, two, or two and a half years, most of them
emerge from it with their lives after dire privations.  But indirectly by
disease, etc., every crisis finds a multitude of victims, as we shall
see.  First, however, let us turn to another cause of abasement to which
the English worker is exposed, a cause permanently active in forcing the
whole class downwards.




IRISH IMMIGRATION.


We have already referred several times in passing to the Irish who have
immigrated into England; and we shall now have to investigate more
closely the causes and results of this immigration.  The rapid extension
of English industry could not have taken place if England had not
possessed in the numerous and impoverished population of Ireland a
reserve at command.  The Irish had nothing to lose at home, and much to
gain in England; and from the time when it became known in Ireland that
the east side of St. George's Channel offered steady work and good pay
for strong arms, every year has brought armies of the Irish hither.  It
has been calculated that more than a million have already immigrated, and
not far from fifty thousand still come every year, nearly all of whom
enter the industrial districts, especially the great cities, and there
form the lowest class of the population.  Thus there are in London,
120,000; in Manchester, 40,000; in Liverpool, 34,000; Bristol, 24,000;
Glasgow, 40,000; Edinburgh, 29,000, poor Irish people. {90a}  These
people having grown up almost without civilisation, accustomed from youth
to every sort of privation, rough, intemperate, and improvident, bring
all their brutal habits with them among a class of the English population
which has, in truth, little inducement to cultivate education and
morality.  Let us hear Thomas Carlyle upon this subject: {90b}

   "The wild Milesian features, looking false ingenuity, restlessness,
   unreason, misery, and mockery, salute you on all highways and byways.
   The English coachman, as he whirls past, lashes the Milesian with his
   whip, curses him with his tongue; the Milesian is holding out his hat
   to beg.  He is the sorest evil this country has to strive with.  In
   his rags and laughing savagery, he is there to undertake all work that
   can be done by mere strength of hand and back--for wages that will
   purchase him potatoes.  He needs only salt for condiment, he lodges to
   his mind in any pig-hutch or dog-hutch, roosts in outhouses, and wears
   a suit of tatters, the getting on and off of which is said to be a
   difficult operation, transacted only in festivals and the high tides
   of the calendar.  The Saxon-man, if he cannot work on these terms,
   finds no work.  The uncivilised Irishman, not by his strength, but by
   the opposite of strength, drives the Saxon native out, takes
   possession in his room.  There abides he, in his squalor and unreason,
   in his falsity and drunken violence, as the ready-made nucleus of
   degradation and disorder.  Whoever struggles, swimming with
   difficulty, may now find an example how the human being can exist not
   swimming, but sunk.  That the condition of the lower multitude of
   English labourers approximates more and more to that of the Irish,
   competing with them in all the markets: that whatsoever labour, to
   which mere strength with little skill will suffice, is to be done,
   will be done not at the English price, but at an approximation to the
   Irish price; at a price superior as yet to the Irish, that is,
   superior to scarcity of potatoes for thirty weeks yearly; superior,
   yet hourly, with the arrival of every new steamboat, sinking nearer to
   an equality with that."

If we except his exaggerated and one-sided condemnation of the Irish
national character, Carlyle is perfectly right.  These Irishmen who
migrate for fourpence to England, on the deck of a steamship on which
they are often packed like cattle, insinuate themselves everywhere.  The
worst dwellings are good enough for them; their clothing causes them
little trouble, so long as it holds together by a single thread; shoes
they know not; their food consists of potatoes and potatoes only;
whatever they earn beyond these needs they spend upon drink.  What does
such a race want with high wages?  The worst quarters of all the large
towns are inhabited by Irishmen.  Whenever a district is distinguished
for especial filth and especial ruinousness, the explorer may safely
count upon meeting chiefly those Celtic faces which one recognises at the
first glance as different from the Saxon physiognomy of the native, and
the singing, aspirate brogue which the true Irishman never loses.  I have
occasionally heard the Irish-Celtic language spoken in the most thickly
populated parts of Manchester.  The majority of the families who live in
cellars are almost everywhere of Irish origin.  In short, the Irish have,
as Dr. Kay says, discovered the minimum of the necessities of life, and
are now making the English workers acquainted with it.  Filth and
drunkenness, too, they have brought with them.  The lack of cleanliness,
which is not so injurious in the country, where population is scattered,
and which is the Irishman's second nature, becomes terrifying and gravely
dangerous through its concentration here in the great cities.  The
Milesian deposits all garbage and filth before his house door here, as he
was accustomed to do at home, and so accumulates the pools and dirt-heaps
which disfigure the working-people's quarters and poison the air.  He
builds a pig-sty against the house wall as he did at home, and if he is
prevented from doing this, he lets the pig sleep in the room with
himself.  This new and unnatural method of cattle-raising in cities is
wholly of Irish origin.  The Irishman loves his pig as the Arab his
horse, with the difference that he sells it when it is fat enough to
kill.  Otherwise, he eats and sleeps with it, his children play with it,
ride upon it, roll in the dirt with it, as any one may see a thousand
times repeated in all the great towns of England.  The filth and
comfortlessness that prevail in the houses themselves it is impossible to
describe.  The Irishman is unaccustomed to the presence of furniture; a
heap of straw, a few rags, utterly beyond use as clothing, suffice for
his nightly couch.  A piece of wood, a broken chair, an old chest for a
table, more he needs not; a tea-kettle, a few pots and dishes, equip his
kitchen, which is also his sleeping and living room.  When he is in want
of fuel, everything combustible within his reach, chairs, door-posts,
mouldings, flooring, finds its way up the chimney.  Moreover, why should
he need much room?  At home in his mud-cabin there was only one room for
all domestic purposes; more than one room his family does not need in
England.  So the custom of crowding many persons into a single room, now
so universal, has been chiefly implanted by the Irish immigration.  And
since the poor devil must have one enjoyment, and society has shut him
out of all others, he betakes himself to the drinking of spirits.  Drink
is the only thing which makes the Irishman's life worth having, drink and
his cheery care-free temperament; so he revels in drink to the point of
the most bestial drunkenness.  The southern facile character of the
Irishman, his crudity, which places him but little above the savage, his
contempt for all humane enjoyments, in which his very crudeness makes him
incapable of sharing, his filth and poverty, all favour drunkenness.  The
temptation is great, he cannot resist it, and so when he has money he
gets rid of it down his throat.  What else should he do?  How can society
blame him when it places him in a position in which he almost of
necessity becomes a drunkard; when it leaves him to himself, to his
savagery?

With such a competitor the English working-man has to struggle with a
competitor upon the lowest plane possible in a civilised country, who for
this very reason requires less wages than any other.  Nothing else is
therefore possible than that, as Carlyle says, the wages of English
working-men should be forced down further and further in every branch in
which the Irish compete with him.  And these branches are many.  All such
as demand little or no skill are open to the Irish.  For work which
requires long training or regular, pertinacious application, the
dissolute, unsteady, drunken Irishman is on too low a plane.  To become a
mechanic, a mill-hand, he would have to adopt the English civilisation,
the English customs, become, in the main, an Englishman.  But for all
simple, less exact work, wherever it is a question more of strength than
skill, the Irishman is as good as the Englishman.  Such occupations are
therefore especially overcrowded with Irishmen: hand-weavers,
bricklayers, porters, jobbers, and such workers, count hordes of Irishmen
among their number, and the pressure of this race has done much to
depress wages and lower the working-class.  And even if the Irish, who
have forced their way into other occupations, should become more
civilised, enough of the old habits would cling to them to have a strong
degrading influence upon their English companions in toil, especially in
view of the general effect of being surrounded by the Irish.  For when,
in almost every great city, a fifth or a quarter of the workers are
Irish, or children of Irish parents, who have grown up among Irish filth,
no one can wonder if the life, habits, intelligence, moral status--in
short, the whole character of the working-class assimilates a great part
of the Irish characteristics.  On the contrary, it is easy to understand
how the degrading position of the English workers, engendered by our
modern history, and its immediate consequences, has been still more
degraded by the presence of Irish competition.




RESULTS.


Having now investigated, somewhat in detail, the conditions under which
the English working-class lives, it is time to draw some further
inferences from the facts presented, and then to compare our inferences
with the actual state of things.  Let us see what the workers themselves
have become under the given circumstances, what sort of people they are,
what their physical, mental, and moral status.

When one individual inflicts bodily injury upon another, such injury that
death results, we call the deed manslaughter; when the assailant knew in
advance that the injury would be fatal, we call his deed murder.  But
when society {95} places hundreds of proletarians in such a position that
they inevitably meet a too early and an unnatural death, one which is
quite as much a death by violence as that by the sword or bullet; when it
deprives thousands of the necessaries of life, places them under
conditions in which they _cannot_ live--forces them, through the strong
arm of the law, to remain in such conditions until that death ensues
which is the inevitable consequence--knows that these thousands of
victims must perish, and yet permits these conditions to remain, its deed
is murder just as surely as the deed of the single individual; disguised,
malicious murder, murder against which none can defend himself, which
does not seem what it is, because no man sees the murderer, because the
death of the victim seems a natural one, since the offence is more one of
omission than of commission.  But murder it remains.  I have now to prove
that society in England daily and hourly commits what the working-men's
organs, with perfect correctness, characterise as social murder, that it
has placed the workers under conditions in which they can neither retain
health nor live long; that it undermines the vital force of these workers
gradually, little by little, and so hurries them to the grave before
their time.  I have further to prove that society knows how injurious
such conditions are to the health and the life of the workers, and yet
does nothing to improve these conditions.  That it _knows_ the
consequences of its deeds; that its act is, therefore, not mere
manslaughter, but murder, I shall have proved, when I cite official
documents, reports of Parliament and of the Government, in substantiation
of my charge.

That a class which lives under the conditions already sketched and is so
ill-provided with the most necessary means of subsistence, cannot be
healthy and can reach no advanced age, is self-evident.  Let us review
the circumstances once more with especial reference to the health of the
workers.  The centralisation of population in great cities exercises of
itself an unfavourable influence; the atmosphere of London can never be
so pure, so rich in oxygen, as the air of the country; two and a half
million pairs of lungs, two hundred and fifty thousand fires, crowded
upon an area three to four miles square, consume an enormous amount of
oxygen, which is replaced with difficulty, because the method of building
cities in itself impedes ventilation.  The carbonic acid gas, engendered
by respiration and fire, remains in the streets by reason of its specific
gravity, and the chief air current passes over the roofs of the city.  The
lungs of the inhabitants fail to receive the due supply of oxygen, and
the consequence is mental and physical lassitude and low vitality.  For
this reason, the dwellers in cities are far less exposed to acute, and
especially to inflammatory, affections than rural populations, who live
in a free, normal atmosphere; but they suffer the more from chronic
affections.  And if life in large cities is, in itself, injurious to
health, how great must be the harmful influence of an abnormal atmosphere
in the working-people's quarters, where, as we have seen, everything
combines to poison the air.  In the country, it may, perhaps, be
comparatively innoxious to keep a dung-heap adjoining one's dwelling,
because the air has free ingress from all sides; but in the midst of a
large town, among closely built lanes and courts that shut out all
movement of the atmosphere, the case is different.  All putrefying
vegetable and animal substances give off gases decidedly injurious to
health, and if these gases have no free way of escape, they inevitably
poison the atmosphere.  The filth and stagnant pools of the
working-people's quarters in the great cities have, therefore, the worst
effect upon the public health, because they produce precisely those gases
which engender disease; so, too, the exhalations from contaminated
streams.  But this is by no means all.  The manner in which the great
multitude of the poor is treated by society to-day is revolting.  They
are drawn into the large cities where they breathe a poorer atmosphere
than in the country; they are relegated to districts which, by reason of
the method of construction, are worse ventilated than any others; they
are deprived of all means of cleanliness, of water itself, since pipes
are laid only when paid for, and the rivers so polluted that they are
useless for such purposes; they are obliged to throw all offal and
garbage, all dirty water, often all disgusting drainage and excrement
into the streets, being without other means of disposing of them; they
are thus compelled to infect the region of their own dwellings.  Nor is
this enough.  All conceivable evils are heaped upon the heads of the
poor.  If the population of great cities is too dense in general, it is
they in particular who are packed into the least space.  As though the
vitiated atmosphere of the streets were not enough, they are penned in
dozens into single rooms, so that the air which they breathe at night is
enough in itself to stifle them.  They are given damp dwellings, cellar
dens that are not waterproof from below, or garrets that leak from above.
Their houses are so built that the clammy air cannot escape.  They are
supplied bad, tattered, or rotten clothing, adulterated and indigestible
food.  They are exposed to the most exciting changes of mental condition,
the most violent vibrations between hope and fear; they are hunted like
game, and not permitted to attain peace of mind and quiet enjoyment of
life.  They are deprived of all enjoyments except that of sexual
indulgence and drunkenness, are worked every day to the point of complete
exhaustion of their mental and physical energies, and are thus constantly
spurred on to the maddest excess in the only two enjoyments at their
command.  And if they surmount all this, they fall victims to want of
work in a crisis when all the little is taken from them that had hitherto
been vouchsafed them.

How is it possible, under such conditions, for the lower class to be
healthy and long lived?  What else can be expected than an excessive
mortality, an unbroken series of epidemics, a progressive deterioration
in the physique of the working population?  Let us see how the facts
stand.

That the dwellings of the workers in the worst portions of the cities,
together with the other conditions of life of this class, engender
numerous diseases, is attested on all sides.  The article already quoted
from the _Artisan_ asserts with perfect truth, that lung diseases must be
the inevitable consequence of such conditions, and that, indeed, cases of
this kind are disproportionately frequent in this class.  That the bad
air of London, and especially of the working-people's districts, is in
the highest degree favourable to the development of consumption, the
hectic appearance of great numbers of persons sufficiently indicates.  If
one roams the streets a little in the early morning, when the multitudes
are on their way to their work, one is amazed at the number of persons
who look wholly or half-consumptive.  Even in Manchester the people have
not the same appearance; these pale, lank, narrow-chested, hollow-eyed
ghosts, whom one passes at every step, these languid, flabby faces,
incapable of the slightest energetic expression, I have seen in such
startling numbers only in London, though consumption carries off a horde
of victims annually in the factory towns of the North.  In competition
with consumption stands typhus, to say nothing of scarlet fever, a
disease which brings most frightful devastation into the ranks of the
working-class.  Typhus, that universally diffused affliction, is
attributed by the official report on the sanitary condition of the
working-class, directly to the bad state of the dwellings in the matters
of ventilation, drainage, and cleanliness.  This report, compiled, it
must not be forgotten, by the leading physicians of England from the
testimony of other physicians, asserts that a single ill-ventilated
court, a single blind alley without drainage, is enough to engender
fever, and usually does engender it, especially if the inhabitants are
greatly crowded.  This fever has the same character almost everywhere,
and develops in nearly every case into specific typhus.  It is to be
found in the working-people's quarters of all great towns and cities, and
in single ill-built, ill-kept streets of smaller places, though it
naturally seeks out single victims in better districts also.  In London
it has now prevailed for a considerable time; its extraordinary violence
in the year 1837 gave rise to the report already referred to.  According
to the annual report of Dr. Southwood Smith on the London Fever Hospital,
the number of patients in 1843 was 1,462, or 418 more than in any
previous year.  In the damp, dirty regions of the north, south, and east
districts of London, this disease raged with extraordinary violence.  Many
of the patients were working-people from the country, who had endured the
severest privation while migrating, and, after their arrival, had slept
hungry and half-naked in the streets, and so fallen victims to the fever.
These people were brought into the hospital in such a state of weakness,
that unusual quantities of wine, cognac, and preparations of ammonia and
other stimulants were required for their treatment; 16.5 per cent. of all
patients died.  This malignant fever is to be found in Manchester; in the
worst quarters of the Old Town, Ancoats, Little Ireland, etc., it is
rarely extinct; though here, as in the _English_ towns generally, it
prevails to a less extent than might be expected.  In Scotland and
Ireland, on the other hand, it rages with a violence that surpasses all
conception.  In Edinburgh and Glasgow it broke out in 1817, after the
famine, and in 1826 and 1837 with especial violence, after the commercial
crisis, subsiding somewhat each time after having raged about three
years.  In Edinburgh about 6,000 persons were attacked by the fever
during the epidemic of 1817, and about 10,000 in that of 1837, and not
only the number of persons attacked but the violence of the disease
increased with each repetition. {100a}

But the fury of the epidemic in all former periods seems to have been
child's play in comparison with its ravages after the crisis of 1842.  One-
sixth of the whole indigent population of Scotland was seized by the
fever, and the infection was carried by wandering beggars with fearful
rapidity from one locality to another.  It did not reach the middle and
upper classes of the population, yet in two months there were more fever
cases than in twelve years before.  In Glasgow, twelve per cent. of the
population were seized in the year 1843; 32,000 persons, of whom thirty-
two per cent. perished, while this mortality in Manchester and Liverpool
does not ordinarily exceed eight per cent.  The illness reached a crisis
on the seventh and fifteenth days; on the latter, the patient usually
became yellow, which our authority {100b} regards as an indication that
the cause of the malady was to be sought in mental excitement and
anxiety.  In Ireland, too, these fever epidemics have become
domesticated.  During twenty-one months of the years 1817-1818, 39,000
fever patients passed through the Dublin hospital; and in a more recent
year, according to Sheriff Alison, {100c} 60,000.  In Cork the fever
hospital received one-seventh of the population in 1817-1818, in Limerick
in the same time one-fourth, and in the bad quarter of Waterford,
nineteen-twentieths of the whole population were ill of the fever at one
time.

When one remembers under what conditions the working-people live, when
one thinks how crowded their dwellings are, how every nook and corner
swarms with human beings, how sick and well sleep in the same room, in
the same bed, the only wonder is that a contagious disease like this
fever does not spread yet farther.  And when one reflects how little
medical assistance the sick have at command, how many are without any
medical advice whatsoever, and ignorant of the most ordinary
precautionary measures, the mortality seems actually small.  Dr. Alison,
who has made a careful study of this disease, attributes it directly to
the want and the wretched condition of the poor, as in the report already
quoted.  He asserts that privations and the insufficient satisfaction of
vital needs are what prepare the frame for contagion and make the
epidemic widespread and terrible.  He proves that a period of privation,
a commercial crisis or a bad harvest, has each time produced the typhus
epidemic in Ireland as in Scotland, and that the fury of the plague has
fallen almost exclusively on the working-class.  It is a noteworthy fact,
that according to his testimony, the majority of persons who perish by
typhus are fathers of families, precisely the persons who can least be
spared by those dependent upon them; and several Irish physicians whom he
quotes bear the same testimony.

Another category of diseases arises directly from the food rather than
the dwellings of the workers.  The food of the labourer, indigestible
enough in itself, is utterly unfit for young children, and he has neither
means nor time to get his children more suitable food.  Moreover, the
custom of giving children spirits, and even opium, is very general; and
these two influences, with the rest of the conditions of life prejudicial
to bodily development, give rise to the most diverse affections of the
digestive organs, leaving life-long traces behind them.  Nearly all
workers have stomachs more or less weak, and are yet forced to adhere to
the diet which is the root of the evil.  How should they know what is to
blame for it?  And if they knew, how could they obtain a more suitable
regimen so long as they cannot adopt a different way of living and are
not better educated?  But new disease arises during childhood from
impaired digestion.  Scrofula is almost universal among the
working-class, and scrofulous parents have scrofulous children,
especially when the original influences continue in full force to operate
upon the inherited tendency of the children.  A second consequence of
this insufficient bodily nourishment, during the years of growth and
development, is rachitis, which is extremely common among the children of
the working-class.  The hardening of the bones is delayed, the
development of the skeleton in general is restricted, and deformities of
the legs and spinal column are frequent, in addition to the usual
rachitic affections.  How greatly all these evils are increased by the
changes to which the workers are subject in consequence of fluctuations
in trade, want of work, and the scanty wages in time of crisis, it is not
necessary to dwell upon.  Temporary want of sufficient food, to which
almost every working-man is exposed at least once in the course of his
life, only contributes to intensify the effects of his usual sufficient
but bad diet.  Children who are half-starved, just when they most need
ample and nutritious food--and how many such there are during every
crisis and even when trade is at its best--must inevitably become weak,
scrofulous and rachitic in a high degree.  And that they do become so,
their appearance amply shows.  The neglect to which the great mass of
working-men's children are condemned leaves ineradicable traces and
brings the enfeeblement of the whole race of workers with it.  Add to
this, the unsuitable clothing of this class, the impossibility of
precautions against colds, the necessity of toiling so long as health
permits, want made more dire when sickness appears, and the only too
common lack of all medical assistance; and we have a rough idea of the
sanitary condition of the English working-class.  The injurious effects
peculiar to single employments as now conducted, I shall not deal with
here.

Besides these, there are other influences which enfeeble the health of a
great number of workers, intemperance most of all.  All possible
temptations, all allurements combine to bring the workers to drunkenness.
Liquor is almost their only source of pleasure, and all things conspire
to make it accessible to them.  The working-man comes from his work
tired, exhausted, finds his home comfortless, damp, dirty, repulsive; he
has urgent need of recreation, he _must_ have something to make work
worth his trouble, to make the prospect of the next day endurable.  His
unnerved, uncomfortable, hypochondriac state of mind and body arising
from his unhealthy condition, and especially from indigestion, is
aggravated beyond endurance by the general conditions of his life, the
uncertainty of his existence, his dependence upon all possible accidents
and chances, and his inability to do anything towards gaining an assured
position.  His enfeebled frame, weakened by bad air and bad food,
violently demands some external stimulus; his social need can be
gratified only in the public-house, he has absolutely no other place
where he can meet his friends.  How can he be expected to resist the
temptation?  It is morally and physically inevitable that, under such
circumstances, a very large number of working-men should fall into
intemperance.  And apart from the chiefly physical influences which drive
the working-man into drunkenness, there is the example of the great mass,
the neglected education, the impossibility of protecting the young from
temptation, in many cases the direct influence of intemperate parents,
who give their own children liquor, the certainty of forgetting for an
hour or two the wretchedness and burden of life, and a hundred other
circumstances so mighty that the workers can, in truth, hardly be blamed
for yielding to such overwhelming pressure.  Drunkenness has here ceased
to be a vice, for which the vicious can be held responsible; it becomes a
phenomenon, the necessary, inevitable effect of certain conditions upon
an object possessed of no volition in relation to those conditions.  They
who have degraded the working-man to a mere object have the
responsibility to bear.  But as inevitably as a great number of working-
men fall a prey to drink, just so inevitably does it manifest its ruinous
influence upon the body and mind of its victims.  All the tendencies to
disease arising from the conditions of life of the workers are promoted
by it, it stimulates in the highest degree the development of lung and
digestive troubles, the rise and spread of typhus epidemics.

Another source of physical mischief to the working-class lies in the
impossibility of employing skilled physicians in cases of illness.  It is
true that a number of charitable institutions strive to supply this want,
that the infirmary in Manchester, for instance, receives or gives advice
and medicine to 2,200 patients annually.  But what is that in a city in
which, according to Gaskell's calculation, {104} three-fourths of the
population need medical aid every year?  English doctors charge high
fees, and working-men are not in a position to pay them.  They can
therefore do nothing, or are compelled to call in cheap charlatans, and
use quack remedies, which do more harm than good.  An immense number of
such quacks thrive in every English town, securing their _clientele_
among the poor by means of advertisements, posters, and other such
devices.  Besides these, vast quantities of patent medicines are sold,
for all conceivable ailments: Morrison's Pills, Parr's Life Pills, Dr.
Mainwaring's Pills, and a thousand other pills, essences, and balsams,
all of which have the property of curing all the ills that flesh is heir
to.  These medicines rarely contain actually injurious substances, but,
when taken freely and often, they affect the system prejudicially; and as
the unwary purchasers are always recommended to take as much as possible,
it is not to be wondered at that they swallow them wholesale whether
wanted or not.

It is by no means unusual for the manufacturer of Parr's Life Pills to
sell twenty to twenty-five thousand boxes of these salutary pills in a
week, and they are taken for constipation by this one, for diarrhoea by
that one, for fever, weakness, and all possible ailments.  As our German
peasants are cupped or bled at certain seasons, so do the English working-
people now consume patent medicines to their own injury and the great
profit of the manufacturer.  One of the most injurious of these patent
medicines is a drink prepared with opiates, chiefly laudanum, under the
name Godfrey's Cordial.  Women who work at home, and have their own and
other people's children to take care of, give them this drink to keep
them quiet, and, as many believe, to strengthen them.  They often begin
to give this medicine to newly-born children, and continue, without
knowing the effects of this "heartsease," until the children die.  The
less susceptible the child's system to the action of the opium, the
greater the quantities administered.  When the cordial ceases to act,
laudanum alone is given, often to the extent of fifteen to twenty drops
at a dose.  The Coroner of Nottingham testified before a Parliamentary
Commission {105a} that one apothecary had, according to his own
statement, used thirteen hundredweight of laudanum in one year in the
preparation of Godfrey's Cordial.  The effects upon the children so
treated may be readily imagined.  They are pale, feeble, wilted, and
usually die before completing the second year.  The use of this cordial
is very extensive in all great towns and industrial districts in the
kingdom.

The result of all these influences is a general enfeeblement of the frame
in the working-class.  There are few vigorous, well-built, healthy
persons among the workers, _i.e_., among the factory operatives, who are
employed in confined rooms, and we are here discussing these only.  They
are almost all weakly, of angular but not powerful build, lean, pale, and
of relaxed fibre, with the exception of the muscles especially exercised
in their work.  Nearly all suffer from indigestion, and consequently from
a more or less hypochondriac, melancholy, irritable, nervous condition.
Their enfeebled constitutions are unable to resist disease, and are
therefore seized by it on every occasion.  Hence they age prematurely,
and die early.  On this point the mortality statistics supply
unquestionable testimony.

According to the Report of Registrar-General Graham, the annual death-
rate of all England and Wales is something less than 2.25 per cent.  That
is to say, out of forty-five persons, one dies every year. {105b}  This
was the average for the year 1839-40.  In 1840-41 the mortality
diminished somewhat, and the death-rate was but one in forty-six.  But in
the great cities the proportion is wholly different.  I have before me
official tables of mortality (_Manchester Guardian_, July 31st, 1844),
according to which the death-rate of several large towns is as
follows:--In Manchester, including Chorlton and Salford, one in 32.72;
and excluding Chorlton and Salford, one in 30.75.  In Liverpool,
including West Derby (suburb), 31.90, and excluding West Derby, 29.90;
while the average of all the districts of Cheshire, Lancashire, and
Yorkshire cited, including a number of wholly or partially rural
districts and many small towns, with a total population of 2,172,506 for
the whole, is one death in 39.80 persons.  How unfavourably the workers
are placed in the great cities, the mortality for Prescott in Lancashire
shows: a district inhabited by miners, and showing a lower sanitary
condition than that of the agricultural districts, mining being by no
means a healthful occupation.  But these miners live in the country, and
the death-rate among them is but one in 47.54, or nearly two-and-a-half
per cent. better than that for all England.  All these statements are
based upon the mortality tables for 1843.  Still higher is the death-rate
in the Scotch cities; in Edinburgh, in 1838-39, one in 29; in 1831, in
the Old Town alone, one in 22.  In Glasgow, according to Dr. Cowen, {106}
the average has been, since 1830, one in 30; and in single years, one in
22 to 24.  That this enormous shortening of life falls chiefly upon the
working-class, that the general average is improved by the smaller
mortality of the upper and middle-classes, is attested upon all sides.
One of the most recent depositions is that of a physician, Dr. P. H.
Holland, in Manchester, who investigated Chorlton-on-Medlock, a suburb of
Manchester, under official commission.  He divided the houses and streets
into three classes each, and ascertained the following variations in the
death-rate:

First class of Streets.  Houses   I. class.  Mortality one in 51
,,     ,,                  ,,    II. ,,       ,,      ,,      45
,,     ,,                  ,,   III. ,,       ,,      ,,      36
Second ,,                  ,,     I. ,,       ,,      ,,      55
,,     ,,                  ,,    II. ,,       ,,      ,,      38
,,     ,,                  ,,   III. ,,       ,,      ,,      35
Third  ,,                  ,,     I. ,,      Wanting  ---   ----
,,     ,,                  ,,    II. ,,      Mortality ,,     35
,,     ,,                  ,,   III. ,,       ,,      ,,      25

It is clear from other tables given by Holland that the mortality in the
_streets_ of the second class is 18 per cent. greater, and in the streets
of the third class 68 per cent. greater than in those of the first class;
that the mortality in the _houses_ of the second class is 31 per cent
greater, and in the third class 78 per cent. greater than in those of the
first class; that the mortality is those bad streets which were improved,
decreased 25 per cent.  He closes with the remark, very frank for an
English bourgeois: {107}

   "When we find the rate of mortality four times as high in some streets
   as in others, and twice as high in whole classes of streets as in
   other classes, and further find that it is all but invariably high in
   those streets which are in bad condition, and almost invariably low in
   those whose condition is good, we cannot resist the conclusion that
   multitudes of our fellow-creatures, _hundreds of our immediate
   neighbours_, are annually destroyed for want of the most evident
   precautions."

The Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Working-Class contains
information which attests the same fact.  In Liverpool, in 1840, the
average longevity of the upper-classes, gentry, professional men, etc.,
was thirty-five years; that of the business men and better-placed
handicraftsmen, twenty-two years; and that of the operatives,
day-labourers, and serviceable class in general, but fifteen years.  The
Parliamentary reports contain a mass of similar facts.

The death-rate is kept so high chiefly by the heavy mortality among young
children in the working-class.  The tender frame of a child is least able
to withstand the unfavourable influences of an inferior lot in life; the
neglect to which they are often subjected, when both parents work or one
is dead, avenges itself promptly, and no one need wonder that in
Manchester, according to the report last quoted, more than fifty-seven
per cent. of the children of the working-class perish before the fifth
year, while but twenty per cent. of the children of the higher classes,
and not quite thirty-two per cent. of the children of all classes in the
country die under five years of age. {108a}  The article of the
_Artisan_, already several times referred to, furnishes exacter
information on this point, by comparing the city death-rate in single
diseases of children with the country death-rate, thus demonstrating
that, in general, epidemics in Manchester and Liverpool are three times
more fatal than in country districts; that affections of the nervous
system are quintupled, and stomach troubles trebled, while deaths from
affections of the lungs in cities are to those in the country as 2.5 to
1.  Fatal cases of smallpox, measles, scarlet fever, and whooping cough,
among small children, are four times more frequent; those of water on the
brain are trebled, and convulsions ten times more frequent.  To quote
another acknowledged authority, I append the following table.  Out of
10,000 persons, there die--{108b}

             Under  5-19   20-39   40-59   60-69   70-79  80-89  90-99  100 x
             5 years
In Rutlandshire, a
healthy agricultural
district     2,865   891   1,275   1,299   1,189   1,428    938  112     3
Essex, marshy
agricultural
district     3,159 1,110   1,526   1,413     963   1,019    630  177     3
Town of Carlisle,
1779-1787, before
introduction of
mills        4,408   921   1,006   1,201     940     826    633  153    22
Town of Carlisle,
after introduction
of mills     4,738   930   l,201   1,134     677     727    452   80     1
Preston, factory
town         4,947 1,136   1,379   1,114     553     532    298   38     3
Leeds, factory
town         5,286   927   1,228   1,198     593     512    225   29     2

Apart from the divers diseases which are the necessary consequence of the
present neglect and oppression of the poorer classes, there are other
influences which contribute to increase the mortality among small
children.  In many families the wife, like the husband, has to work away
from home, and the consequence is the total neglect of the children, who
are either locked up or given out to be taken care of.  It is, therefore,
not to be wondered at if hundreds of them perish through all manner of
accidents.  Nowhere are so many children run over, nowhere are so many
killed by falling, drowning, or burning, as in the great cities and towns
of England.  Deaths from burns and scalds are especially frequent, such a
case occurring nearly every week during the winter months in Manchester,
and very frequently in London, though little mention is made of them in
the papers.  I have at hand a copy of the _Weekly Despatch_ of December
15th, 1844, according to which, in the week from December 1st to December
7th inclusive, _six_ such cases occurred.  These unhappy children,
perishing in this terrible way, are victims of our social disorder, and
of the property-holding classes interested in maintaining and prolonging
this disorder.  Yet one is left in doubt whether even this terribly
torturing death is not a blessing for the children in rescuing them from
a long life of toil and wretchedness, rich in suffering and poor in
enjoyment.  So far has it gone in England; and the bourgeoisie reads
these things every day in the newspapers and takes no further trouble in
the matter.  But it cannot complain if, after the official and
non-official testimony here cited which must be known to it, I broadly
accuse it of social murder.  Let the ruling class see to it that these
frightful conditions are ameliorated, or let it surrender the
administration of the common interests to the labouring-class.  To the
latter course it is by no means inclined; for the former task, so long as
it remains the bourgeoisie crippled by bourgeois prejudice, it has not
the needed power.  For if, at last, after hundreds of thousands of
victims have perished, it manifests some little anxiety for the future,
passing a "Metropolitan Buildings Act," under which the most unscrupulous
overcrowding of dwellings is to be, at least in some slight degree,
restricted; if it points with pride to measures which, far from attacking
the root of the evil, do not by any means meet the demands of the
commonest sanitary policy, it cannot thus vindicate itself from the
accusation.  The English bourgeoisie has but one choice, either to
continue its rule under the unanswerable charge of murder and in spite of
this charge, or to abdicate in favour of the labouring-class.  Hitherto
it has chosen the former course.

Let us turn from the physical to the mental state of the workers.  Since
the bourgeoisie vouchsafes them only so much of life as is absolutely
necessary, we need not wonder that it bestows upon them only so much
education as lies in the interest of the bourgeoisie; and that, in truth,
is not much.  The means of education in England are restricted out of all
proportion to the population.  The few day schools at the command of the
working-class are available only for the smallest minority, and are bad
besides.  The teachers, worn-out workers, and other unsuitable persons
who only turn to teaching in order to live, are usually without the
indispensable elementary knowledge, without the moral discipline so
needful for the teacher, and relieved of all public supervision.  Here,
too, free competition rules, and, as usual, the rich profit by it, and
the poor, for whom competition is _not_ free, who have not the knowledge
needed to enable them to form a correct judgment, have the evil
consequences to bear.  Compulsory school attendance does not exist.  In
the mills it is, as we shall see, purely nominal; and when in the session
of 1843 the Ministry was disposed to make this nominal compulsion
effective, the manufacturing bourgeoisie opposed the measure with all its
might, though the working-class was outspokenly in favour of compulsory
school attendance.  Moreover, a mass of children work the whole week
through in the mills or at home, and therefore cannot attend school.  The
evening schools, supposed to be attended by children who are employed
during the day, are almost abandoned or attended without benefit.  It is
asking too much, that young workers who have been using themselves up
twelve hours in the day, should go to school from eight to ten at night.
And those who try it usually fall asleep, as is testified by hundreds of
witnesses in the Children's Employment Commission's Report.  Sunday
schools have been founded, it is true, but they, too, are most scantily
supplied with teachers, and can be of use to those only who have already
learnt something in the day schools.  The interval from one Sunday to the
next is too long for an ignorant child to remember in the second sitting
what it learned in the first, a week before.  The Children's Employment
Commission's Report furnishes a hundred proofs, and the Commission itself
most emphatically expresses the opinion, that neither the week-day nor
the Sunday schools, in the least degree, meet the needs of the nation.
This report gives evidence of ignorance in the working-class of England,
such as could hardly be expected in Spain or Italy.  It cannot be
otherwise; the bourgeoisie has little to hope, and much to fear, from the
education of the working-class.  The Ministry, in its whole enormous
budget of 55,000,000 pounds, has only the single trifling item of 40,000
pounds for public education, and, but for the fanaticism of the religious
sects which does at least as much harm as good, the means of education
would be yet more scanty.  As it is, the State Church manages its
national schools and the various sects their sectarian schools for the
sole purpose of keeping the children of the brethren of the faith within
the congregation, and of winning away a poor childish soul here and there
from some other sect.  The consequence is that religion, and precisely
the most unprofitable side of religion, polemical discussion, is made the
principal subject of instruction, and the memory of the children
overburdened with incomprehensible dogmas and theological distinctions;
that sectarian hatred and bigotry are awakened as early as possible, and
all rational mental and moral training shamefully neglected.  The working
class has repeatedly demanded of Parliament a system of strictly secular
public education, leaving religion to the ministers of the sects; but,
thus far, no Ministry has been induced to grant it.  The Minister is the
obedient servant of the bourgeoisie, and the bourgeoisie is divided into
countless sects; but each would gladly grant the workers the otherwise
dangerous education on the sole condition of their accepting, as an
antidote, the dogmas peculiar to the especial sect in question.  And as
these sects are still quarrelling among themselves for supremacy, the
workers remain for the present without education.  It is true that the
manufacturers boast of having enabled the majority to read, but the
quality of the reading is appropriate to the source of the instruction,
as the Children's Employment Commission proves.  According to this
report, he who knows his letters can read enough to satisfy the
conscience of the manufacturers.  And when one reflects upon the confused
orthography of the English language which makes reading one of the arts,
learned only under long instruction, this ignorance is readily
understood.  Very few working-people write readily; and writing
orthographically is beyond the powers even of many "educated" persons.
The Sunday schools of the State Church, of the Quakers, and, I think, of
several other sects, do not teach writing, "because it is too worldly an
employment for Sunday."  The quality of the instruction offered the
workers in other directions may be judged from a specimen or two, taken
from the Children's Employment Commission's Report, which unfortunately
does not embrace mill-work proper:

   "In Birmingham," says Commissioner Grainger, "the children examined by
   me are, as a whole, utterly wanting in all that could be in the
   remotest degree called a useful education.  Although in almost all the
   schools religious instruction alone is furnished, the profoundest
   ignorance even upon that subject prevailed."--"In Wolverhampton," says
   Commissioner Horne, "I found, among others, the following example: A
   girl of eleven years had attended both day and Sunday school, 'had
   never heard of another world, of Heaven, or another life.'  A boy,
   seventeen years old, did not know that twice two are four, nor how
   many farthings in two pence even when the money was placed in his
   hand.  Several boys had never heard of London nor of Willenhall,
   though the latter was but an hour's walk from their homes, and in the
   closest relations with Wolverhampton.  Several had never heard the
   name of the Queen nor other names, such as Nelson, Wellington,
   Bonaparte; but it was noteworthy that those who had never heard even
   of St. Paul, Moses, or Solomon, were very well instructed as to the
   life, deeds, and character of Dick Turpin, and especially of Jack
   Sheppard.  A youth of sixteen did not know how many twice two are, nor
   how much four farthings make.  A youth of seventeen asserted that four
   farthings are four half pence; a third, seventeen years old, answered
   several very simple questions with the brief statement, that he 'was
   ne jedge o' nothin'.'" {112a}  These children who are crammed with
   religious doctrines four or five years at a stretch, know as little at
   the end as at the beginning.  One child "went to Sunday school
   regularly for five years; does not know who Jesus Christ is, but had
   heard the name; had never heard of the twelve Apostles, Samson, Moses,
   Aaron, etc." {112b}  Another "attended Sunday school regularly six
   years; knows who Jesus Christ was; he died on the Cross to save our
   Saviour; had never heard of St. Peter or St. Paul." {113a}  A third,
   "attended different Sunday schools seven years; can read only the
   thin, easy books with simple words of one syllable; has heard of the
   Apostles, but does not know whether St. Peter was one or St. John; the
   latter must have been St. John Wesley." {113b}  To the question who
   Christ was, Horne received the following answers among others: "He was
   Adam," "He was an Apostle," "He was the Saviour's Lord's Son," and
   from a youth of sixteen: "He was a king of London long ago."  In
   Sheffield, Commissioner Symonds let the children from the Sunday
   school read aloud; they could not tell what they had read, or what
   sort of people the Apostles were, of whom they had just been reading.
   After he had asked them all one after the other about the Apostles
   without securing a single correct answer, one sly-looking little
   fellow, with great glee, called out: "I know, mister; they were the
   lepers!" {113c}  From the pottery districts and from Lancashire the
   reports are similar.

This is what the bourgeoisie and the State are doing for the education
and improvement of the working-class.  Fortunately the conditions under
which this class lives are such as give it a sort of practical training,
which not only replaces school cramming, but renders harmless the
confused religious notions connected with it, and even places the workers
in the vanguard of the national movement of England.  Necessity is the
mother of invention, and what is still more important, of thought and
action.  The English working-man who can scarcely read and still less
write, nevertheless knows very well where his own interest and that of
the nation lies.  He knows, too, what the especial interest of the
bourgeoisie is, and what he has to expect of that bourgeoisie.  If he
cannot write he can speak, and speak in public; if he has no arithmetic,
he can, nevertheless, reckon with the Political Economists enough to see
through a Corn-Law-repealing bourgeois, and to get the better of him in
argument; if celestial matters remain very mixed for him in spite of all
the effort of the preachers, he sees all the more clearly into
terrestrial, political, and social questions.  We shall have occasion to
refer again to this point; and pass now to the moral characteristics of
our workers.

It is sufficiently clear that the instruction in morals can have no
better effect than the religious teaching, with which in all English
schools it is mixed up.  The simple principles which, for plain human
beings, regulate the relations of man to man, brought into the direst
confusion by our social state, our war of each against all, necessarily
remain confused and foreign to the working-man when mixed with
incomprehensible dogmas, and preached in the religious form of an
arbitrary and dogmatic commandment.  The schools contribute, according to
the confession of all authorities, and especially of the Children's
Employment Commission, almost nothing to the morality of the
working-class.  So short-sighted, so stupidly narrow-minded is the
English bourgeoisie in its egotism, that it does not even take the
trouble to impress upon the workers the morality of the day, which the
bourgeoisie has patched together in its own interest for its own
protection!  Even this precautionary measure is too great an effort for
the enfeebled and sluggish bourgeoisie.  A time must come when it will
repent its neglect, too late.  But it has no right to complain that the
workers know nothing of its system of morals, and do not act in
accordance with it.

Thus are the workers cast out and ignored by the class in power, morally
as well as physically and mentally.  The only provision made for them is
the law, which fastens upon them when they become obnoxious to the
bourgeoisie.  Like the dullest of the brutes, they are treated to but one
form of education, the whip, in the shape of force, not convincing but
intimidating.  There is, therefore, no cause for surprise if the workers,
treated as brutes, actually become such; or if they can maintain their
consciousness of manhood only by cherishing the most glowing hatred, the
most unbroken inward rebellion against the bourgeoisie in power.  They
are men so long only as they burn with wrath against the reigning class.
They become brutes the moment they bend in patience under the yoke, and
merely strive to make life endurable while abandoning the effort to break
the yoke.

This, then, is all that the bourgeoisie has done for the education of the
proletariat--and when we take into consideration all the circumstances in
which this class lives, we shall not think the worse of it for the
resentment which it cherishes against the ruling class.  The moral
training which is not given to the worker in school is not supplied by
the other conditions of his life; that moral training, at least, which
alone has worth in the eyes of the bourgeoisie; his whole position and
environment involves the strongest temptation to immorality.  He is poor,
life offers him no charm, almost every enjoyment is denied him, the
penalties of the law have no further terrors for him; why should he
restrain his desires, why leave to the rich the enjoyment of his
birthright, why not seize a part of it for himself?  What inducement has
the proletarian not to steal!  It is all very pretty and very agreeable
to the ear of the bourgeois to hear the "sacredness of property"
asserted; but for him who has none, the sacredness of property dies out
of itself.  Money is the god of this world; the bourgeois takes the
proletarian's money from him and so makes a practical atheist of him.  No
wonder, then, if the proletarian retains his atheism and no longer
respects the sacredness and power of the earthly God.  And when the
poverty of the proletarian is intensified to the point of actual lack of
the barest necessaries of life, to want and hunger, the temptation to
disregard all social order does but gain power.  This the bourgeoisie for
the most part recognises.  Symonds {115a} observes that poverty exercises
the same ruinous influence upon the mind which drunkenness exercises upon
the body; and Dr. Alison explains to property-holding readers, with the
greatest exactness, what the consequences of social oppression must be
for the working-class. {115b}  Want leaves the working-man the choice
between starving slowly, killing himself speedily, or taking what he
needs where he finds it--in plain English, stealing.  And there is no
cause for surprise that most of them prefer stealing to starvation and
suicide.

True, there are, within the working-class, numbers too moral to steal
even when reduced to the utmost extremity, and these starve or commit
suicide.  For suicide, formerly the enviable privilege of the upper
classes, has become fashionable among the English workers, and numbers of
the poor kill themselves to avoid the misery from which they see no other
means of escape.

But far more demoralising than his poverty in its influence upon the
English working-man is the insecurity of his position, the necessity of
living upon wages from hand to mouth, that in short which makes a
proletarian of him.  The smaller peasants in Germany are usually poor,
and often suffer want, but they are less at the mercy of accident, they
have at least something secure.  The proletarian, who has nothing but his
two hands, who consumes to-day what he earned yesterday, who is subject
to every possible chance, and has not the slightest guarantee for being
able to earn the barest necessities of life, whom every crisis, every
whim of his employer may deprive of bread, this proletarian is placed in
the most revolting, inhuman position conceivable for a human being.  The
slave is assured of a bare livelihood by the self-interest of his master,
the serf has at least a scrap of land on which to live; each has at worst
a guarantee for life itself.  But the proletarian must depend upon
himself alone, and is yet prevented from so applying his abilities as to
be able to rely upon them.  Everything that the proletarian can do to
improve his position is but a drop in the ocean compared with the floods
of varying chances to which he is exposed, over which he has not the
slightest control.  He is the passive subject of all possible
combinations of circumstances, and must count himself fortunate when he
has saved his life even for a short time; and his character and way of
living are naturally shaped by these conditions.  Either he seeks to keep
his head above water in this whirlpool, to rescue his manhood, and this
he can do solely in rebellion {116} against the class which plunders him
so mercilessly and then abandons him to his fate, which strives to hold
him in this position so demoralising to a human being; or he gives up the
struggle against his fate as hopeless, and strives to profit, so far as
he can, by the most favourable moment.  To save is unavailing, for at the
utmost he cannot save more than suffices to sustain life for a short
time, while if he falls out of work, it is for no brief period.  To
accumulate lasting property for himself is impossible; and if it were
not, he would only cease to be a working-man and another would take his
place.  What better thing can he do, then, when he gets high wages, than
live well upon them?  The English bourgeoisie is violently scandalised at
the extravagant living of the workers when wages are high; yet it is not
only very natural but very sensible of them to enjoy life when they can,
instead of laying up treasures which are of no lasting use to them, and
which in the end moth and rust (_i.e_., the bourgeoisie) get possession
of.  Yet such a life is demoralising beyond all others.  What Carlyle
says of the cotton spinners is true of all English industrial workers:
{117a}

   "Their trade, now in plethoric prosperity, anon extenuated into
   inanition and 'short time,' is of the nature of gambling; they live by
   it like gamblers, now in luxurious superfluity, now in starvation.
   Black, mutinous discontent devours them; simply the miserablest
   feeling that can inhabit the heart of man.  English commerce, with its
   world-wide, convulsive fluctuations, with its immeasurable Proteus
   Steam demon, makes all paths uncertain for them, all life a
   bewilderment; society, steadfastness, peaceable continuance, the first
   blessings of man are not theirs.--This world is for them no home, but
   a dingy prison-house, of reckless unthrift, rebellion, rancour,
   indignation against themselves and against all men.  Is it a green,
   flowery world, with azure everlasting sky stretched over it, the work
   and government of a God; or a murky, simmering Tophet, of copperas
   fumes, cotton fuz, gin riot, wrath and toil, created by a Demon,
   governed by a Demon?"

And elsewhere: {117b}

   "Injustice, infidelity to truth and fact and Nature's order, being
   properly the one evil under the sun, and the feeling of injustice the
   one intolerable pain under the sun, our grand question as to the
   condition of these working-men would be: Is it just?  And, first of
   all, what belief have they themselves formed about the justice of it?
   The words they promulgate are notable by way of answer; their actions
   are still more notable.  Revolt, sullen, revengeful humour of revolt
   against the upper classes, decreasing respect for what their temporal
   superiors command, decreasing faith for what their spiritual superiors
   teach, is more and more the universal spirit of the lower classes.
   Such spirit may be blamed, may be vindicated, but all men must
   recognise it as extant there, all may know that it is mournful, that
   unless altered it will be fatal."

Carlyle is perfectly right as to the facts and wrong only in censuring
the wild rage of the workers against the higher classes.  This rage, this
passion, is rather the proof that the workers feel the inhumanity of
their position, that they refuse to be degraded to the level of brutes,
and that they will one day free themselves from servitude to the
bourgeoisie.  This may be seen in the case of those who do not share this
wrath; they either bow humbly before the fate that overtakes them, live a
respectful private life as well as they can, do not concern themselves as
to the course of public affairs, help the bourgeoisie to forge the chains
of the workers yet more securely, and stand upon the plane of
intellectual nullity that prevailed before the industrial period began;
or they are tossed about by fate, lose their moral hold upon themselves
as they have already lost their economic hold, live along from day to
day, drink and fall into licentiousness; and in both cases they are
brutes.  The last-named class contributes chiefly to the "rapid increase
of vice," at which the bourgeoisie is so horrified after itself setting
in motion the causes which give rise to it.

Another source of demoralisation among the workers is their being
condemned to work.  As voluntary, productive activity is the highest
enjoyment known to us, so is compulsory toil the most cruel, degrading
punishment.  Nothing is more terrible than being constrained to do some
one thing every day from morning until night against one's will.  And the
more a man the worker feels himself, the more hateful must his work be to
him, because he feels the constraint, the aimlessness of it for himself.
Why does he work?  For love of work?  From a natural impulse?  Not at
all!  He works for money, for a thing which has nothing whatsoever to do
with the work itself; and he works so long, moreover, and in such
unbroken monotony, that this alone must make his work a torture in the
first weeks if he has the least human feeling left.  The division of
labour has multiplied the brutalising influences of forced work.  In most
branches the worker's activity is reduced to some paltry, purely
mechanical manipulation, repeated minute after minute, unchanged year
after year. {119}  How much human feeling, what abilities can a man
retain in his thirtieth year, who has made needle points or filed toothed
wheels twelve hours every day from his early childhood, living all the
time under the conditions forced upon the English proletarian?  It is
still the same thing since the introduction of steam.  The worker's
activity is made easy, muscular effort is saved, but the work itself
becomes unmeaning and monotonous to the last degree.  It offers no field
for mental activity, and claims just enough of his attention to keep him
from thinking of anything else.  And a sentence to such work, to work
which takes his whole time for itself, leaving him scarcely time to eat
and sleep, none for physical exercise in the open air, or the enjoyment
of Nature, much less for mental activity, how can such a sentence help
degrading a human being to the level of a brute?  Once more the worker
must choose, must either surrender himself to his fate, become a "good"
workman, heed "faithfully" the interest of the bourgeoisie, in which case
he most certainly becomes a brute, or else he must rebel, fight for his
manhood to the last, and this he can only do in the fight against the
bourgeoisie.

And when all these conditions have engendered vast demoralisation among
the workers, a new influence is added to the old, to spread this
degradation more widely and carry it to the extremest point.  This
influence is the centralisation of the population.  The writers of the
English bourgeoisie are crying murder at the demoralising tendency of the
great cities, like perverted Jeremiahs, they sing dirges, not over the
destruction, but the growth of the cities.  Sheriff Alison attributes
almost everything, and Dr. Vaughan, author of "The Age of Great Cities,"
still more to this influence.  And this is natural, for the propertied
class has too direct an interest in the other conditions which tend to
destroy the worker body and soul.  If they should admit that "poverty,
insecurity, overwork, forced work, are the chief ruinous influences,"
they would have to draw the conclusion, "then let us give the poor
property, guarantee their subsistence, make laws against overwork," and
this the bourgeoisie dare not formulate.  But the great cities have grown
up so spontaneously, the population has moved into them so wholly of its
own motion, and the inference that manufacture and the middle-class which
profits from it alone have created the cities is so remote, that it is
extremely convenient for the ruling class to ascribe all the evil to this
apparently unavoidable source; whereas the great cities really only
secure a more rapid and certain development for evils already existing in
the germ.  Alison is humane enough to admit this; he is no thoroughbred
Liberal manufacturer, but only a half developed Tory bourgeois, and he
has, therefore, an open eye, now and then, where the full-fledged
bourgeois is still stone blind.  Let us hear him: {120}

   "It is in the great cities that vice has spread her temptations, and
   pleasure her seductions, and folly her allurements; that guilt is
   encouraged by the hope of impunity, and idleness fostered by the
   frequency of example.  It is to these great marts of human corruption
   that the base and the profligate resort from the simplicity of country
   life; it is here that they find victims whereon to practise their
   iniquity, and gains to reward the dangers that attend them.  Virtue is
   here depressed from the obscurity in which it is involved.  Guilt is
   matured from the difficulty of its detection; licentiousness is
   rewarded by the immediate enjoyment which it promises.  If any person
   will walk through St. Giles's, the crowded alleys of Dublin, or the
   poorer quarters of Glasgow by night, he will meet with ample proof of
   these observations; he will no longer wonder at the disorderly habits
   and profligate enjoyments of the lower orders; his astonishment will
   be, not that there is so much, but that there is so little crime in
   the world.  The great cause of human corruption in these crowded
   situations is the contagious nature of bad example and the extreme
   difficulty of avoiding the seductions of vice when they are brought
   into close and daily proximity with the younger part of the people.
   Whatever we may think of the strength of virtue, experience proves
   that the higher orders are indebted for their exemption from atrocious
   crime or disorderly habits chiefly to their fortunate removal from the
   scene of temptation; and that where they are exposed to the seductions
   which assail their inferiors, they are noways behind them in yielding
   to their influence.  It is the peculiar misfortune of the poor in
   great cities that they cannot fly from these irresistible temptations,
   but that, turn where they will, they are met by the alluring forms of
   vice, or the seductions of guilty enjoyment.  It is the experienced
   impossibility of concealing the attractions of vice from the younger
   part of the poor in great cities which exposes them to so many causes
   of demoralisation.  All this proceeds not from any unwonted or
   extraordinary depravity in the character of these victims of
   licentiousness, but from the almost irresistible nature of the
   temptations to which the poor are exposed.  The rich, who censure
   their conduct, would in all probability yield as rapidly as they have
   done to the influence of similar causes.  There is a certain degree of
   misery, a certain proximity to sin, which virtue is rarely able to
   withstand, and which the young, in particular, are generally unable to
   resist.  The progress of vice in such circumstances is almost as
   certain and often nearly as rapid as that of physical contagion."

And elsewhere:

   "When the higher orders for their own profit have drawn the labouring-
   classes in great numbers into a small space, the contagion of guilt
   becomes rapid and unavoidable.  The lower orders, situated as they are
   in so far as regards moral or religious instruction, are frequently
   hardly more to be blamed for yielding to the temptations which
   surround them than for falling victims to the typhus fever."

Enough!  The half-bourgeois Alison betrays to us, however narrow his
manner of expressing himself, the evil effect of the great cities upon
the moral development of the workers.  Another, a bourgeois _pur sang_, a
man after the heart of the Anti-Corn Law League, Dr. Andrew Ure, {122}
betrays the other side.  He tells us that life in great cities
facilitates cabals among the workers and confers power on the Plebs.  If
here the workers are not educated (_i.e_., to obedience to the
bourgeoisie), they may view matters one-sidedly, from the standpoint of a
sinister selfishness, and may readily permit themselves to be hoodwinked
by sly demagogues; nay, they might even be capable of viewing their
greatest benefactors, the frugal and enterprising capitalists, with a
jealous and hostile eye.  Here proper training alone can avail, or
national bankruptcy and other horrors must follow, since a revolution of
the workers could hardly fail to occur.  And our bourgeois is perfectly
justified in his fears.  If the centralisation of population stimulates
and develops the property-holding class, it forces the development of the
workers yet more rapidly.  The workers begin to feel as a class, as a
whole; they begin to perceive that, though feeble as individuals, they
form a power united; their separation from the bourgeoisie, the
development of views peculiar to the workers and corresponding to their
position in life, is fostered, the consciousness of oppression awakens,
and the workers attain social and political importance.  The great cities
are the birthplaces of labour movements; in them the workers first began
to reflect upon their own condition, and to struggle against it; in them
the opposition between proletariat and bourgeoisie first made itself
manifest; from them proceeded the Trades-Unions, Chartism, and Socialism.
The great cities have transformed the disease of the social body, which
appears in chronic form in the country, into an acute one, and so made
manifest its real nature and the means of curing it.  Without the great
cities and their forcing influence upon the popular intelligence, the
working-class would be far less advanced than it is.  Moreover, they have
destroyed the last remnant of the patriarchal relation between working-
men and employers, a result to which manufacture on a large scale has
contributed by multiplying the employes dependent upon a single employer.
The bourgeoisie deplores all this, it is true, and has good reason to do
so; for, under the old conditions, the bourgeois was comparatively secure
against a revolt on the part of his hands.  He could tyrannise over them
and plunder them to his heart's content, and yet receive obedience,
gratitude, and assent from these stupid people by bestowing a trifle of
patronising friendliness which cost him nothing, and perhaps some paltry
present, all apparently out of pure, self-sacrificing, uncalled-for
goodness of heart, but really not one-tenth part of his duty.  As an
individual bourgeois, placed under conditions which he had not himself
created, he might do his duty at least in part; but, as a member of the
ruling class, which, by the mere fact of its ruling, is responsible for
the condition of the whole nation, he did nothing of what his position
involved.  On the contrary, he plundered the whole nation for his own
individual advantage.  In the patriarchal relation that hypocritically
concealed the slavery of the worker, the latter must have remained an
intellectual zero, totally ignorant of his own interest, a mere private
individual.  Only when estranged from his employer, when convinced that
the sole bond between employer and employe is the bond of pecuniary
profit, when the sentimental bond between them, which stood not the
slightest test, had wholly fallen away, then only did the worker begin to
recognise his own interests and develop independently; then only did he
cease to be the slave of the bourgeoisie in his thoughts, feelings, and
the expression of his will.  And to this end manufacture on a grand scale
and in great cities has most largely contributed.

Another influence of great moment in forming the character of the English
workers is the Irish immigration already referred to.  On the one hand it
has, as we have seen, degraded the English workers, removed them from
civilisation, and aggravated the hardship of their lot; but, on the other
hand, it has thereby deepened the chasm between workers and bourgeoisie,
and hastened the approaching crisis.  For the course of the social
disease from which England is suffering is the same as the course of a
physical disease; it develops, according to certain laws, has its own
crisis, the last and most violent of which determines the fate of the
patient.  And as the English nation cannot succumb under the final
crises, but must go forth from it, born again, rejuvenated, we can but
rejoice over everything which accelerates the course of the disease.  And
to this the Irish immigration further contributes by reason of the
passionate, mercurial Irish temperament, which it imports into England
and into the English working-class.  The Irish and English are to each
other much as the French and the Germans; and the mixing of the more
facile, excitable, fiery Irish temperament with the stable, reasoning,
persevering English must, in the long run, be productive only of good for
both.  The rough egotism of the English bourgeoisie would have kept its
hold upon the working-class much more firmly if the Irish nature,
generous to a fault, and ruled primarily by sentiment, had not
intervened, and softened the cold, rational English character in part by
a mixture of the races, and in part by the ordinary contact of life.

In view of all this, it is not surprising that the working-class has
gradually become a race wholly apart from the English bourgeoisie.  The
bourgeoisie has more in common with every other nation of the earth than
with the workers in whose midst it lives.  The workers speak other
dialects, have other thoughts and ideals, other customs and moral
principles, a different religion and other politics than those of the
bourgeoisie.  Thus they are two radically dissimilar nations, as unlike
as difference of race could make them, of whom we on the Continent have
known but one, the bourgeoisie.  Yet it is precisely the other, the
people, the proletariat, which is by far the more important for the
future of England.

Of the public character of the English working-man, as it finds
expression in associations and political principles, we shall have
occasion to speak later; let us here consider the results of the
influences cited above, as they affect the private character of the
worker.  The workman is far more humane in ordinary life than the
bourgeois.  I have already mentioned the fact that the beggars are
accustomed to turn almost exclusively to the workers, and that, in
general, more is done by the workers than by the bourgeoisie for the
maintenance of the poor.  This fact, which any one may prove for himself
any day, is confirmed, among others, by Dr. Parkinson, Canon of
Manchester, who says: {125}

   "The poor give one another more than the rich give the poor.  I can
   confirm my statement by the testimony of one of our eldest, most
   skilful, most observant, and humane physicians, Dr. Bardsley, who has
   often declared that the total sum which the poor yearly bestow upon
   one another, surpasses that which the rich contribute in the same
   time."

In other ways, too, the humanity of the workers is constantly manifesting
itself pleasantly.  They have experienced hard times themselves, and can
therefore feel for those in trouble, whence they are more approachable,
friendlier, and less greedy for money, though they need it far more, than
the property-holding class.  For them money is worth only what it will
buy, whereas for the bourgeois it has an especial inherent value, the
value of a god, and makes the bourgeois the mean, low money-grabber that
he is.  The working-man who knows nothing of this feeling of reverence
for money is therefore less grasping than the bourgeois, whose whole
activity is for the purpose of gain, who sees in the accumulations of his
money-bags the end and aim of life.  Hence the workman is much less
prejudiced, has a clearer eye for facts as they are than the bourgeois,
and does not look at everything through the spectacles of personal
selfishness.  His faulty education saves him from religious
prepossessions, he does not understand religious questions, does not
trouble himself about them, knows nothing of the fanaticism that holds
the bourgeoisie bound; and if he chances to have any religion, he has it
only in name, not even in theory.  Practically he lives for this world,
and strives to make himself at home in it.  All the writers of the
bourgeoisie are unanimous on this point, that the workers are not
religious, and do not attend church.  From the general statement are to
be excepted the Irish, a few elderly people, and the half-bourgeois, the
overlookers, foremen, and the like.  But among the masses there prevails
almost universally a total indifference to religion, or at the utmost,
some trace of Deism too undeveloped to amount to more than mere words, or
a vague dread of the words infidel, atheist, etc.  The clergy of all
sects is in very bad odour with the working-men, though the loss of its
influence is recent.  At present, however, the mere cry: "He's a parson!"
is often enough to drive one of the clergy from the platform of a public
meeting.  And like the rest of the conditions under which he lives, his
want of religious and other culture contributes to keep the working-man
more unconstrained, freer from inherited stable tenets and cut-and-dried
opinions, than the bourgeois who is saturated with the class prejudices
poured into him from his earliest youth.  There is nothing to be done
with the bourgeois; he is essentially conservative in however liberal a
guise, his interest is bound up with that of the property-holding class,
he is dead to all active movement; he is losing his position in the
forefront of England's historical development.  The workers are taking
his place, in rightful claim first, then in fact.

All this, together with the correspondent public action of the workers,
with which we shall deal later, forms the favourable side of the
character of this class; the unfavourable one may be quite as briefly
summed up, and follows quite as naturally out of the given causes.
Drunkenness, sexual irregularities, brutality, and disregard for the
rights of property are the chief points with which the bourgeois charges
them.  That they drink heavily is to be expected.  Sheriff Alison asserts
that in Glasgow some thirty thousand working-men get drunk every Saturday
night, and the estimate is certainly not exaggerated; and that in that
city in 1830, one house in twelve, and in 1840, one house in ten, was a
public-house; that in Scotland, in 1823, excise was paid upon 2,300,000
gallons; in 1837, upon 6,620,000 gallons; in England, in 1823, upon
1,976,000 gallons, and in 1837, upon 7,875,000 gallons of spirits.  The
Beer Act of 1830, which facilitated the opening of beerhouses (jerry
shops), whose keepers are licensed to sell beer to be drunk on the
premises, facilitated the spread of intemperance by bringing a beerhouse,
so to say, to everybody's door.  In nearly every street there are several
such beerhouses, and among two or three neighbouring houses in the
country one is sure to be a jerry shop.  Besides these, there are hush-
shops in multitudes, _i.e_., secret drinking-places which are not
licensed, and quite as many secret distilleries which produce great
quantities of spirits in retired spots, rarely visited by the police, in
the great cities.  Gaskell estimates these secret distilleries in
Manchester alone at more than a hundred, and their product at 156,000
gallons at the least.  In Manchester there are, besides, more than a
thousand public-houses selling all sorts of alcoholic drinks, or quite as
many in proportion to the number of inhabitants as in Glasgow.  In all
other great towns, the state of things is the same.  And when one
considers, apart from the usual consequences of intemperance, that men
and women, even children, often mothers with babies in their arms, come
into contact in these places with the most degraded victims of the
bourgeois regime, with thieves, swindlers, and prostitutes; when one
reflects that many a mother gives the baby on her arm gin to drink, the
demoralising effects of frequenting such places cannot be denied.

On Saturday evenings, especially when wages are paid and work stops
somewhat earlier than usual, when the whole working-class pours from its
own poor quarters into the main thoroughfares, intemperance may be seen
in all its brutality.  I have rarely come out of Manchester on such an
evening without meeting numbers of people staggering and seeing others
lying in the gutter.  On Sunday evening the same scene is usually
repeated, only less noisily.  And when their money is spent, the
drunkards go to the nearest pawnshop, of which there are plenty in every
city--over sixty in Manchester, and ten or twelve in a single street of
Salford, Chapel Street--and pawn whatever they possess.  Furniture,
Sunday clothes where such exist, kitchen utensils in masses are fetched
from the pawnbrokers on Saturday night only to wander back, almost
without fail, before the next Wednesday, until at last some accident
makes the final redemption impossible, and one article after another
falls into the clutches of the usurer, or until he refuses to give a
single farthing more upon the battered, used-up pledge.  When one has
seen the extent of intemperance among the workers in England, one readily
believes Lord Ashley's statement that this class annually expends
something like twenty-five million pounds sterling upon intoxicating
liquor: and the deterioration in external conditions, the frightful
shattering of mental and physical health, the ruin of all domestic
relations which follow may readily be imagined.  True, the temperance
societies have done much, but what are a few thousand teetotallers among
the millions of workers?  When Father Matthew, the Irish apostle of
temperance, passes through the English cities, from thirty to sixty
thousand workers take the pledge; but most of them break it again within
a month.  If one counts up the immense numbers who have taken the pledge
in the last three or four years in Manchester, the total is greater than
the whole population of the town--and still it is by no means evident
that intemperance is diminishing.

Next to intemperance in the enjoyment of intoxicating liquors, one of the
principal faults of English working-men is sexual licence.  But this,
too, follows with relentless logic, with inevitable necessity out of the
position of a class left to itself, with no means of making fitting use
of its freedom.  The bourgeoisie has left the working-class only these
two pleasures, while imposing upon it a multitude of labours and
hardships, and the consequence is that the working-men, in order to get
something from life, concentrate their whole energy upon these two
enjoyments, carry them to excess, surrender to them in the most unbridled
manner.  When people are placed under conditions which appeal to the
brute only, what remains to them but to rebel or to succumb to utter
brutality?  And when, moreover, the bourgeoisie does its full share in
maintaining prostitution--and how many of the 40,000 prostitutes who fill
the streets of London every evening live upon the virtuous bourgeoisie!
How many of them owe it to the seduction of a bourgeois, that they must
offer their bodies to the passers-by in order to live?--surely it has
least of all a right to reproach the workers with their sexual brutality.

The failings of the workers in general may be traced to an unbridled
thirst for pleasure, to want of providence, and of flexibility in fitting
into the social order, to the general inability to sacrifice the pleasure
of the moment to a remoter advantage.  But is that to be wondered at?
When a class can purchase few and only the most sensual pleasures by its
wearying toil, must it not give itself over blindly and madly to those
pleasures?  A class about whose education no one troubles himself, which
is a playball to a thousand chances, knows no security in life--what
incentives has such a class to providence, to "respectability," to
sacrifice the pleasure of the moment for a remoter enjoyment, most
uncertain precisely by reason of the perpetually varying, shifting
conditions under which the proletariat lives?  A class which bears all
the disadvantages of the social order without enjoying its advantages,
one to which the social system appears in purely hostile aspects--who can
demand that such a class respect this social order?  Verily that is
asking much!  But the working-man cannot escape the present arrangement
of society so long as it exists, and when the individual worker resists
it, the greatest injury falls upon himself.

Thus the social order makes family life almost impossible for the worker.
In a comfortless, filthy house, hardly good enough for mere nightly
shelter, ill-furnished, often neither rain-tight nor warm, a foul
atmosphere filling rooms overcrowded with human beings, no domestic
comfort is possible.  The husband works the whole day through, perhaps
the wife also and the elder children, all in different places; they meet
night and morning only, all under perpetual temptation to drink; what
family life is possible under such conditions?  Yet the working-man
cannot escape from the family, must live in the family, and the
consequence is a perpetual succession of family troubles, domestic
quarrels, most demoralising for parents and children alike.  Neglect of
all domestic duties, neglect of the children, especially, is only too
common among the English working-people, and only too vigorously fostered
by the existing institutions of society.  And children growing up in this
savage way, amidst these demoralising influences, are expected to turn
out goody-goody and moral in the end!  Verily the requirements are naive,
which the self-satisfied bourgeois makes upon the working-man!

The contempt for the existing social order is most conspicuous in its
extreme form--that of offences against the law.  If the influences
demoralising to the working-man act more powerfully, more concentratedly
than usual, he becomes an offender as certainly as water abandons the
fluid for the vaporous state at 80 degrees, Reaumur.  Under the brutal
and brutalising treatment of the bourgeoisie, the working-man becomes
precisely as much a thing without volition as water, and is subject to
the laws of nature with precisely the same necessity; at a certain point
all freedom ceases.  Hence with the extension of the proletariat, crime
has increased in England, and the British nation has become the most
criminal in the world.  From the annual criminal tables of the Home
Secretary, it is evident that the increase of crime in England has
proceeded with incomprehensible rapidity.  The numbers of arrests for
_criminal_ offences reached in the years: 1805, 4,605; 1810, 5,146; 1815,
7,898; 1820, 13,710; 1825, 14,437; 1830,18,107; 1835, 20,731; 1840,
27,187; 1841, 27,760; 1842, 31,309 in England and Wales alone.  That is
to say, they increased sevenfold in thirty-seven years.  Of these
arrests, in 1842, 4,497 were made in Lancashire alone, or more than 14
per cent. of the whole; and 4,094 in Middlesex, including London, or more
than 13 per cent.  So that two districts which include great cities with
large proletarian populations, produced one-fourth of the total amount of
crime, though their population is far from forming one-fourth of the
whole.  Moreover, the criminal tables prove directly that nearly all
crime arises within the proletariat; for, in 1842, taking the average,
out of 100 criminals, 32.35 could neither read nor write; 58.32 read and
wrote imperfectly; 6.77 could read and write well; 0.22 had enjoyed a
higher education, while the degree of education of 2.34 could not be
ascertained.  In Scotland, crime has increased yet more rapidly.  There
were but 89 arrests for criminal offences in 1819, and as early as 1837
the number had risen to 3,176, and in 1842 to 4,189.  In Lanarkshire,
where Sheriff Alison himself made out the official report, population has
doubled once in thirty years, and crime once in five and a half, or six
times more rapidly than the population.  The offences, as in all
civilised countries, are, in the great majority of cases, against
property, and have, therefore, arisen from want in some form; for what a
man has, he does not steal.  The proportion of offences against property
to the population, which in the Netherlands is as 1: 7,140, and in
France, as 1: 1,804, was in England, when Gaskell wrote, as 1: 799.  The
proportion of offences against persons to the population is, in the
Netherlands, 1: 28,904; in France, 1: 17,573; in England, 1: 23,395; that
of crimes in general to the population in the agricultural districts, as
1: 1,043; in the manufacturing districts as 1: 840. {131a}  In the whole
of England to-day the proportion is 1: 660; {131b} though it is scarcely
ten years since Gaskell's book appeared!

These facts are certainly more than sufficient to bring any one, even a
bourgeois, to pause and reflect upon the consequences of such a state of
things.  If demoralisation and crime multiply twenty years longer in this
proportion (and if English manufacture in these twenty years should be
less prosperous than heretofore, the progressive multiplication of crime
can only continue the more rapidly), what will the result be?  Society is
already in a state of visible dissolution; it is impossible to pick up a
newspaper without seeing the most striking evidence of the giving way of
all social ties.  I look at random into a heap of English journals lying
before me; there is the _Manchester Guardian_ for October 30, 1844, which
reports for three days.  It no longer takes the trouble to give exact
details as to Manchester, and merely relates the most interesting cases:
that the workers in a mill have struck for higher wages without giving
notice, and been condemned by a Justice of the Peace to resume work; that
in Salford a couple of boys had been caught stealing, and a bankrupt
tradesman tried to cheat his creditors.  From the neighbouring towns the
reports are more detailed: in Ashton, two thefts, one burglary, one
suicide; in Bury, one theft; in Bolton, two thefts, one revenue fraud; in
Leigh, one theft; in Oldham, one strike for wages, one theft, one fight
between Irish women, one non-Union hatter assaulted by Union men, one
mother beaten by her son, one attack upon the police, one robbery of a
church; in Stockport, discontent of working-men with wages, one theft,
one fraud, one fight, one wife beaten by her husband; in Warrington, one
theft, one fight; in Wigan, one theft, and one robbery of a church.  The
reports of the London papers are much worse; frauds, thefts, assaults,
family quarrels crowd one another.  A _Times_ of September 12, 1844,
falls into my hand, which gives a report of a single day, including a
theft, an attack upon the police, a sentence upon a father requiring him
to support his illegitimate son, the abandonment of a child by its
parents, and the poisoning of a man by his wife.  Similar reports are to
be found in all the English papers.  In this country, social war is under
full headway, every one stands for himself, and fights for himself
against all comers, and whether or not he shall injure all the others who
are his declared foes, depends upon a cynical calculation as to what is
most advantageous for himself.  It no longer occurs to any one to come to
a peaceful understanding with his fellow-man; all differences are settled
by threats, violence, or in a law-court.  In short, every one sees in his
neighbour an enemy to be got out of the way, or, at best, a tool to be
used for his own advantage.  And this war grows from year to year, as the
criminal tables show, more violent, passionate, irreconcilable.  The
enemies are dividing gradually into two great camps--the bourgeoisie on
the one hand, the workers on the other.  This war of each against all, of
the bourgeoisie against the proletariat, need cause us no surprise, for
it is only the logical sequel of the principle involved in free
competition.  But it may very well surprise us that the bourgeoisie
remains so quiet and composed in the face of the rapidly gathering storm-
clouds, that it can read all these things daily in the papers without, we
will not say indignation at such a social condition, but fear of its
consequences, of a universal outburst of that which manifests itself
symptomatically from day to day in the form of crime.  But then it is the
bourgeoisie, and from its standpoint cannot even see the facts, much less
perceive their consequences.  One thing only is astounding, that class
prejudice and preconceived opinions can hold a whole class of human
beings in such perfect, I might almost say, such mad blindness.
Meanwhile, the development of the nation goes its way whether the
bourgeoisie has eyes for it or not, and will surprise the
property-holding class one day with things not dreamed of in its
philosophy.




SINGLE BRANCHES OF INDUSTRY.  FACTORY HANDS.


In dealing now with the more important branches of the English
manufacturing proletariat, we shall begin, according to the principle
already laid down, with the factory-workers, _i.e_., those who are
comprised under the Factory Act.  This law regulates the length of the
working-day in mills in which wool, silk, cotton, and flax are spun or
woven by means of water or steam-power, and embraces, therefore, the more
important branches of English manufacture.  The class employed by them is
the most intelligent and energetic of all the English workers, and,
therefore, the most restless and most hated by the bourgeoisie.  It
stands as a whole, and the cotton-workers pre-eminently stand, at the
head of the labour movement, as their masters the manufacturers,
especially those of Lancashire, take the lead of the bourgeois agitation.

We have already seen in the introduction how the population employed in
working up the textile materials were first torn from their former way of
life.  It is, therefore, not surprising that the progress of mechanical
invention in later years also affected precisely these workers most
deeply and permanently.  The history of cotton manufacture as related by
Ure, {134a} Baines, {134b} and others is the story of improvements in
every direction, most of which have become domesticated in the other
branches of industry as well.  Hand-work is superseded by machine-work
almost universally, nearly all manipulations are conducted by the aid of
steam or water, and every year is bringing further improvements.

In a well-ordered state of society, such improvements could only be a
source of rejoicing; in a war of all against all, individuals seize the
benefit for themselves, and so deprive the majority of the means of
subsistence.  Every improvement in machinery throws workers out of
employment, and the greater the advance, the more numerous the
unemployed; each great improvement produces, therefore, upon a number of
workers the effect of a commercial crisis, creates want, wretchedness,
and crime.  Take a few examples.  The very first invention, the jenny,
worked by one man, produced at least sixfold what the spinning-wheel had
yielded in the same time; thus every new jenny threw five spinners out of
employment.  The throstle, which, in turn, produced much more than the
jenny, and like it, was worked by one man, threw still more people out of
employment.  The mule, which required yet fewer hands in proportion to
the product, had the same effect, and every improvement in the mule,
every multiplication of its spindles, diminished still further the number
of workers employed.  But this increase of the number of spindles in the
mule is so great that whole armies of workers have been thrown out of
employment by it.  For, whereas one spinner, with a couple of children
for piecers, formerly set six hundred spindles in motion, he could now
manage fourteen hundred to two thousand spindles upon two mules, so that
two adult spinners and a part of the piecers whom they employed were
thrown out.  And since self-acting mules have been introduced into a very
large number of spinning-mills, the spinners' work is wholly performed by
the machine.  There lies before me a book from the pen of James Leach,
{135} one of the recognised leaders of the Chartists in Manchester.  The
author has worked for years in various branches of industry, in mills and
coal mines, and is known to me personally as an honest, trustworthy, and
capable man.  In consequence of his political position, he had at command
extensive detailed information as to the different factories, collected
by the workers themselves, and he publishes tables from which it is clear
that in 1841, in 35 factories, 1,060 fewer mule spinners were employed
than in 1829, though the number of spindles in these 35 factories had
increased by 99,239.  He cites five factories in which no spinners
whatever are employed, self-actors only being used.  While the number of
spindles increased by 10 per cent., the number of spinners diminished
more than 60 per cent.  And Leach adds that since 1841, so many
improvements have been introduced by double-decking and other means, that
in some of the factories named, half the operatives have been discharged.
In one factory alone, where eighty spinners were employed a short time
ago, there are now but twenty left; the others having been discharged or
set at children's work for children's wages.  Of Stockport Leach tells a
similar story, that in 1835, 800 spinners were employed, and in 1840 but
140, though the manufacture of Stockport has greatly increased during the
last eight or nine years.  Similar improvements have now been made in
carding frames, by which one-half the operatives have been thrown out of
employment.  In one factory improved frames have been set up, which have
thrown four hands out of eight out of work, besides which the employer
reduced the wages of the four retained from eight shillings to seven.  The
same process has gone on in the weaving industry; the power-loom has
taken possession of one branch of hand-weaving after another, and since
it produces much more than the hand-loom, while one weaver can work two
looms, it has superseded a multitude of working-people.  And in all sorts
of manufacture, in flax and wool-spinning, in silk-twisting, the case is
the same.  The power-loom, too, is beginning to appropriate one branch
after another of wool and linen-weaving; in Rochdale alone, there are
more power than hand-looms in flannel and other wool-weaving branches.
The bourgeoisie usually replies to this, that improvements in machinery,
by decreasing the cost of production, supply finished goods at lower
prices, and that these reduced prices cause such an increase in
consumption that the unemployed operatives soon find full employment in
newly-founded factories. {136}  The bourgeoisie is so far correct that
under certain conditions favourable for the general development of
manufacture, every reduction in price of goods _in which the raw material
is cheap_, greatly increases consumption, and gives rise to the building
of new factories; but every further word of the assertion is a lie.  The
bourgeoisie ignores the fact that it takes years for these results of the
decrease in price to follow and for new factories to be built; it is
silent upon the point that every improvement in machinery throws the real
work, the expenditure of force, more and more upon the machine, and so
transforms the work of full-grown men into mere supervision, which a
feeble woman or even a child can do quite as well, and does for half or
two-thirds wages; that, therefore, grown men are constantly more and more
supplanted and _not re-employed_ by the increase in manufacture; it
conceals the fact that whole branches of industry fall away, or are so
changed that they must be learned afresh; and it takes good care not to
confess what it usually harps upon, whenever the question of forbidding
the work of children is broached, that factory-work must be learned in
earliest youth in order to be learned properly.  It does not mention the
fact that the process of improvement goes steadily on, and that as soon
as the operative has succeeded in making himself at home in a new branch,
if he actually does succeed in so doing, this, too, is taken from him,
and with it the last remnant of security which remained to him for
winning his bread.  But the bourgeoisie gets the benefit of the
improvements in machinery; it has a capital opportunity for piling up
money during the first years while many old machines are still in use,
and the improvement not yet universally introduced; and it would be too
much to ask that it should have an open eye for the disadvantages
inseparable from these improvements.

The fact that improved machinery reduces wages has also been as violently
disputed by the bourgeoisie, as it is constantly reiterated by the
working-men.  The bourgeoisie insists that although the price of piece-
work has been reduced, yet the total of wages for the week's work has
rather risen than fallen, and the condition of the operatives rather
improved than deteriorated.  It is hard to get to the bottom of the
matter, for the operatives usually dwell upon the price of piece-work.
But it is certain that the weekly wage, also, has, in many branches of
work, been reduced by the improvement of machinery.  The so-called fine
spinners (who spin fine mule yarn), for instance, do receive high wages,
thirty to forty shillings a week, because they have a powerful
association for keeping wages up, and their craft requires long training;
but the coarse spinners who have to compete against self-actors (which
are not as yet adapted for fine spinning), and whose association was
broken down by the introduction of these machines, receive very low
wages.  A mule spinner told me that he does not earn more than fourteen
shillings a week, and his statement agrees with that of Leach, that in
various factories the coarse spinners earn less than sixteen shillings
and sixpence a week, and that a spinner, who years ago earned thirty
shillings, can now hardly scrape up twelve and a half, and had not earned
more on an average in the past year.  The wages of women and children may
perhaps have fallen less, but only because they were not high from the
beginning.  I know several women, widows with children, who have trouble
enough to earn eight to nine shillings a week; and that they and their
families cannot live decently upon that sum, every one must admit who
knows the price of the barest necessaries of life in England.  That wages
in general have been reduced by the improvement of machinery is the
unanimous testimony of the operatives.  The bourgeois assertion that the
condition of the working-class has been improved by machinery is most
vigorously proclaimed a falsehood in every meeting of working-men in the
factory districts.  And even if it were true that the relative wage, the
price of piece-work only, has fallen, while the absolute wage, the sum to
be earned in the week, remained unchanged, what would follow?  That the
operatives have had quietly to look on while the manufacturers filled
their purses from every improvement without giving the hands the smallest
share in the gain.  The bourgeois forgets, in fighting the working-man,
the most ordinary principles of his own Political Economy.  He who at
other times swears by Malthus, cries out in his anxiety before the
workers: "Where could the millions by which the population of England has
increased find work, without the improvements in machinery?" {138}  As
though the bourgeois did not know well enough that without machinery and
the expansion of industry which it produced, these "millions" would never
have been brought into the world and grown up!  The service which
machinery has rendered the workers is simply this: that it has brought
home to their minds the necessity of a social reform by means of which
machinery shall no longer work against but for them.  Let the wise
bourgeois ask the people who sweep the streets in Manchester and
elsewhere (though even this is past now, since machines for the purpose
have been invented and introduced), or sell salt, matches, oranges, and
shoe-strings on the streets, or even beg, what they were formerly, and he
will see how many will answer: "Mill-hands thrown out of work by
machinery."  The consequences of improvement in machinery under our
present social conditions are, for the working-man, solely injurious, and
often in the highest degree oppressive.  Every new advance brings with it
loss of employment, want, and suffering, and in a country like England
where, without that, there is usually a "surplus population," to be
discharged from work is the worst that can befall the operative.  And
what a dispiriting, unnerving influence this uncertainty of his position
in life, consequent upon the unceasing progress of machinery, must
exercise upon the worker, whose lot is precarious enough without it!  To
escape despair, there are but two ways open to him; either inward and
outward revolt against the bourgeoisie or drunkenness and general
demoralisation.  And the English operatives are accustomed to take refuge
in both.  The history of the English proletariat relates hundreds of
uprisings against machinery and the bourgeoisie; we have already spoken
of the moral dissolution which, in itself, is only another form of
despair.

The worst situation is that of those workers who have to compete against
a machine that is making its way.  The price of the goods which they
produce adapts itself to the price of the kindred product of the machine,
and as the latter works more cheaply, its human competitor has but the
lowest wages.  The same thing happens to every operative employed upon an
old machine in competition with later improvements.  And who else is
there to bear the hardship?  The manufacturer will not throw out his old
apparatus, nor will he sustain the loss upon it; out of the dead
mechanism he can make nothing, so he fastens upon the living worker, the
universal scapegoat of society.  Of all the workers in competition with
machinery, the most ill-used are the hand-loom cotton weavers.  They
receive the most trifling wages, and, with full work, are not in a
position to earn more than ten shillings a week.  One class of woven
goods after another is annexed by the power-loom, and hand-weaving is the
last refuge of workers thrown out of employment in other branches, so
that the trade is always overcrowded.  Hence it comes that, in average
seasons, the hand-weaver counts himself fortunate if he can earn six or
seven shillings a week, while to reach this sum he must sit at his loom
fourteen to eighteen hours a day.  Most woven goods require moreover a
damp weaving-room, to keep the weft from snapping, and in part, for this
reason, in part because of their poverty, which prevents them from paying
for better dwellings, the workrooms of these weavers are usually without
wooden or paved floors.  I have been in many dwellings of such weavers,
in remote, vile courts and alleys, usually in cellars.  Often
half-a-dozen of these hand-loom weavers, several of them married, live
together in a cottage with one or two workrooms, and one large sleeping-
room.  Their food consists almost exclusively of potatoes, with perhaps
oatmeal porridge, rarely milk, and scarcely ever meat.  Great numbers of
them are Irish or of Irish descent.  And these poor hand-loom weavers,
first to suffer from every crisis, and last to be relieved from it, must
serve the bourgeoisie as a handle in meeting attacks upon the factory
system.  "See," cries the bourgeois, triumphantly, "see how these poor
creatures must famish, while the mill operatives are thriving, and _then_
judge the factory {140} system!"  As though it were not precisely the
factory system and the machinery belonging to it which had so shamefully
crushed the hand-loom weavers, and as though the bourgeoisie did not know
this quite as well as ourselves!  But the bourgeoisie has interests at
stake, and so a falsehood or two and a bit of hypocrisy won't matter
much.

Let us examine somewhat more closely the fact that machinery more and
more supersedes the work of men.  The human labour, involved in both
spinning and weaving, consists chiefly in piecing broken threads, as the
machine does all the rest.  This work requires no muscular strength, but
only flexibility of finger.  Men are, therefore, not only not needed for
it, but actually, by reason of the greater muscular development of the
hand, less fit for it than women and children, and are, therefore,
naturally almost superseded by them.  Hence, the more the use of the
arms, the expenditure of strength, can be transferred to steam or water-
power, the fewer men need be employed; and as women and children work
more cheaply, and in these branches better than men, they take their
places.  In the spinning-mills women and girls are to be found in almost
exclusive possession of the throstles; among the mules one man, an adult
spinner (with self-actors, he, too, becomes superfluous), and several
piecers for tying the threads, usually children or women, sometimes young
men of from eighteen to twenty years, here and there an old spinner {141}
thrown out of other employment.  At the power-looms women, from fifteen
to twenty years, are chiefly employed, and a few men; these, however,
rarely remain at this trade after their twenty-first year.  Among the
preparatory machinery, too, women alone are to be found, with here and
there a man to clean and sharpen the carding-frames.  Besides all these,
the factories employ numbers of children--doffers--for mounting and
taking down bobbins, and a few men as overlookers, a mechanic and an
engineer for the steam-engines, carpenters, porters, etc.; but the actual
work of the mills is done by women and children.  This the manufacturers
deny.

They published last year elaborate tables to prove that machinery does
not supersede adult male operatives.  According to these tables, rather
more than half of all the factory-workers employed, _viz_., 52 per cent.,
were females and 48 per cent. males, and of those operatives more than
half were over eighteen years old.  So far, so good.  But the
manufacturers are very careful not to tell us, how many of the adults
were men and how many women.  And this is just the point.  Besides this,
they have evidently counted the mechanics, engineers, carpenters, all the
men employed in any way in the factories, perhaps even the clerks, and
still they have not the courage to tell the whole truth.  These
publications teem generally with falsehoods, perversions, crooked
statements, with calculations of averages, that prove a great deal for
the uninitiated reader and nothing for the initiated, and with
suppressions of facts bearing on the most important points; and they
prove only the selfish blindness and want of uprightness of the
manufacturers concerned.  Let us take some of the statements of a speech
with which Lord Ashley introduced the Ten Hours' Bill, March 15th, 1844,
into the House of Commons.  Here he gives some data as to the relations
of sex and age of the operatives, not yet refuted by the manufacturers,
whose statements, as quoted above, cover moreover only a part of the
manufacturing industry of England.  Of 419,560 factory operatives of the
British Empire in 1839, 192,887, or nearly half, were under eighteen
years of age, and 242,296 of the female sex, of whom 112,192 were less
than eighteen years old.  There remain, therefore, 80,695 male operatives
under eighteen years, and 96,569 adult male operatives, _or not one full
quarter_ of the whole number.  In the cotton factories, 56.25 per cent.;
in the woollen mills, 69.5 per cent.; in the silk mills, 70.5 per cent.;
in the flax-spinning mills, 70.5 per cent. of all operatives are of the
female sex.  These numbers suffice to prove the crowding out of adult
males.  But you have only to go into the nearest mill to see the fact
confirmed.  Hence follows of necessity that inversion of the existing
social order which, being forced upon them, has the most ruinous
consequences for the workers.  The employment of women at once breaks up
the family; for when the wife spends twelve or thirteen hours every day
in the mill, and the husband works the same length of time there or
elsewhere, what becomes of the children?  They grow up like wild weeds;
they are put out to nurse for a shilling or eighteenpence a week, and how
they are treated may be imagined.  Hence the accidents to which little
children fall victims multiply in the factory districts to a terrible
extent.  The lists of the Coroner of Manchester {143a} showed for nine
months: 69 deaths from burning, 56 from drowning, 23 from falling, 77
from other causes, or a total of 225 {143b} deaths from accidents, while
in non-manufacturing Liverpool during twelve months there were but 146
fatal accidents.  The mining accidents are excluded in both cases; and
since the Coroner of Manchester has no authority in Salford, the
population of both places mentioned in the comparison is about the same.
The _Manchester Guardian_ reports one or more deaths by burning in almost
every number.  That the general mortality among young children must be
increased by the employment of the mothers is self-evident, and is placed
beyond all doubt by notorious facts.  Women often return to the mill
three or four days after confinement, leaving the baby, of course; in the
dinner hour they must hurry home to feed the child and eat something, and
what sort of suckling that can be is also evident.  Lord Ashley repeats
the testimony of several workwomen: "M. H., twenty years old, has two
children, the youngest a baby, that is tended by the other, a little
older.  The mother goes to the mill shortly after five o'clock in the
morning, and comes home at eight at night; all day the milk pours from
her breasts, so that her clothing drips with it."  "H. W. has three
children, goes away Monday morning at five o'clock, and comes back
Saturday evening; has so much to do for the children then that she cannot
get to bed before three o'clock in the morning; often wet through to the
skin, and obliged to work in that state."  She said: "My breasts have
given me the most frightful pain, and I have been dripping wet with
milk."  The use of narcotics to keep the children still is fostered by
this infamous system, and has reached a great extent in the factory
districts.  Dr. Johns, Registrar in Chief for Manchester, is of opinion
that this custom is the chief source of the many deaths from convulsions.
The employment of the wife dissolves the family utterly and of necessity,
and this dissolution, in our present society, which is based upon the
family, brings the most demoralising consequences for parents as well as
children.  A mother who has no time to trouble herself about her child,
to perform the most ordinary loving services for it during its first
year, who scarcely indeed sees it, can be no real mother to the child,
must inevitably grow indifferent to it, treat it unlovingly like a
stranger.  The children who grow up under such conditions are utterly
ruined for later family life, can never feel at home in the family which
they themselves found, because they have always been accustomed to
isolation, and they contribute therefore to the already general
undermining of the family in the working-class.  A similar dissolution of
the family is brought about by the employment of the children.  When they
get on far enough to earn more than they cost their parents from week to
week, they begin to pay the parents a fixed sum for board and lodging,
and keep the rest for themselves.  This often happens from the fourteenth
or fifteenth year. {144}  In a word, the children emancipate themselves,
and regard the paternal dwelling as a lodging-house, which they often
exchange for another, as suits them.

In many cases the family is not wholly dissolved by the employment of the
wife, but turned upside down.  The wife supports the family, the husband
sits at home, tends the children, sweeps the room and cooks.  This case
happens very frequently; in Manchester alone, many hundred such men could
be cited, condemned to domestic occupations.  It is easy to imagine the
wrath aroused among the working-men by this reversal of all relations
within the family, while the other social conditions remain unchanged.
There lies before me a letter from an English working-man, Robert
Pounder, Baron's Buildings, Woodhouse, Moorside, in Leeds (the
bourgeoisie may hunt him up there; I give the exact address for the
purpose), written by him to Oastler: {145}

He relates how another working-man, being on tramp, came to St. Helens,
in Lancashire, and there looked up an old friend.  He found him in a
miserable, damp cellar, scarcely furnished; and when my poor friend went
in, there sat poor Jack near the fire, and what did he, think you? why he
sat and mended his wife's stockings with the bodkin; and as soon as he
saw his old friend at the door-post, he tried to hide them.  But Joe,
that is my friend's name, had seen it, and said: "Jack, what the devil
art thou doing?  Where is the missus?  Why, is that thy work?" and poor
Jack was ashamed, and said: "No, I know this is not my work, but my poor
missus is i' th' factory; she has to leave at half-past five and works
till eight at night, and then she is so knocked up that she cannot do
aught when she gets home, so I have to do everything for her what I can,
for I have no work, nor had any for more nor three years, and I shall
never have any more work while I live;" and then he wept a big tear.  Jack
again said: "There is work enough for women folks and childer hereabouts,
but none for men; thou mayest sooner find a hundred pound on the road
than work for men--but I should never have believed that either thou or
any one else would have seen me mending my wife's stockings, for, it is
bad work.  But she can hardly stand on her feet; I am afraid she will be
laid up, and then I don't know what is to become of us, for it's a good
bit that she has been the man in the house and I the woman; it is bad
work, Joe;" and he cried bitterly, and said, "It has not been always so."
"No," said Joe; "but when thou hadn't no work, how hast thou not
shifted?"  "I'll tell thee, Joe, as well as I can, but it was bad enough;
thou knowest when I got married I had work plenty, and thou knows I was
not lazy."  "No, that thou wert not."  "And we had a good furnished
house, and Mary need not go to work.  I could work for the two of us; but
now the world is upside down.  Mary has to work and I have to stop at
home, mind the childer sweep and wash, bake and mend; and, when the poor
woman comes home at night, she is knocked up.  Thou knows, Joe, it's hard
for one that was used different."  "Yes, boy, it is hard."  And then Jack
began to cry again, and he wished he had never married, and that he had
never been born; but he had never thought, when he wed Mary, that it
would come to this.  "I have often cried over it," said Jack.  Now when
Joe heard this, he told me that he had cursed and damned the factories,
and the masters, and the Government, with all the curses that he had
learned while he was in the factory from a child.

Can any one imagine a more insane state of things than that described in
this letter?  And yet this condition, which unsexes the man and takes
from the woman all womanliness without being able to bestow upon the man
true womanliness, or the woman true manliness--this condition which
degrades, in the most shameful way, both sexes, and, through them,
Humanity, is the last result of our much-praised civilisation, the final
achievement of all the efforts and struggles of hundreds of generations
to improve their own situation and that of their posterity.  We must
either despair of mankind, and its aims and efforts, when we see all our
labour and toil result in such a mockery, or we must admit that human
society has hitherto sought salvation in a false direction; we must admit
that so total a reversal of the position of the sexes can have come to
pass only because the sexes have been placed in a false position from the
beginning.  If the reign of the wife over the husband, as inevitably
brought about by the factory system, is inhuman, the pristine rule of the
husband over the wife must have been inhuman too.  If the wife can now
base her supremacy upon the fact that she supplies the greater part, nay,
the whole of the common possession, the necessary inference is that this
community of possession is no true and rational one, since one member of
the family boasts offensively of contributing the greater share.  If the
family of our present society is being thus dissolved, this dissolution
merely shows that, at bottom, the binding tie of this family was not
family affection, but private interest lurking under the cloak of a
pretended community of possessions.  The same relation exists on the part
of those children who support unemployed parents {147a} when they do not
directly pay board as already referred to.  Dr. Hawkins testified in the
Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report that this relation is common
enough, and in Manchester it is notorious.  In this case the children are
the masters in the house, as the wife was in the former case, and Lord
Ashley gives an example of this in his speech: {147b} A man berated his
two daughters for going to the public house, and they answered that they
were tired of being ordered about, saying, "Damn you, we have to keep
you!"  Determined to keep the proceeds of their work for themselves, they
left the family dwelling, and abandoned their parents to their fate.

The unmarried women, who have grown up in mills, are no better off than
the married ones.  It is self-evident that a girl who has worked in a
mill from her ninth year is in no position to understand domestic work,
whence it follows that female operatives prove wholly inexperienced and
unfit as housekeepers.  They cannot knit or sew, cook or wash, are
unacquainted with the most ordinary duties of a housekeeper, and when
they have young children to take care of, have not the vaguest idea how
to set about it.  The Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report gives dozens
of examples of this, and Dr. Hawkins, Commissioner for Lancashire,
expresses his opinion as follows: {147c}

   "The girls marry early and recklessly; they have neither means, time,
   nor opportunity to learn the ordinary duties of household life; but if
   they had them all, they would find no time in married life for the
   performance of these duties.  The mother is more than twelve hours
   away from her child daily; the baby is cared for by a young girl or an
   old woman, to whom it is given to nurse.  Besides this, the dwelling
   of the mill-hands is too often no home but a cellar, which contains no
   cooking or washing utensils, no sewing or mending materials, nothing
   which makes life agreeable and civilised, or the domestic hearth
   attractive.  For these and other reasons, and especially for the sake
   of the better chances of life for the little children, I can but wish
   and hope that a time may come in which married women will be shut out
   of the factories." {148a}

But that is the least of the evil.  The moral consequences of the
employment of women in factories are even worse.  The collecting of
persons of both sexes and all ages in a single workroom, the inevitable
contact, the crowding into a small space of people, to whom neither
mental nor moral education has been given, is not calculated for the
favourable development of the female character.  The manufacturer, if he
pays any attention to the matter, can interfere only when something
scandalous actually happens; the permanent, less conspicuous influence of
persons of dissolute character, upon the more moral, and especially upon
the younger ones, he cannot ascertain, and consequently cannot prevent.
But precisely this influence is the most injurious.  The language used in
the mills is characterised by many witnesses in the report of 1833, as
"indecent," "bad," "filthy," etc. {148b}  It is the same process upon a
small scale which we have already witnessed upon a large one in the great
cities.  The centralisation of population has the same influence upon the
same persons, whether it affects them in a great city or a small factory.
The smaller the mill the closer the packing, and the more unavoidable the
contact; and the consequences are not wanting.  A witness in Leicester
said that he would rather let his daughter beg than go into a factory;
that they are perfect gates of hell; that most of the prostitutes of the
town had their employment in the mills to thank for their present
situation. {148c}  Another, in Manchester, "did not hesitate to assert
that three-fourths of the young factory employees, from fourteen to
twenty years of age, were unchaste." {149a}  Commissioner Cowell
expresses it as his opinion, that the morality of the factory operatives
is somewhat below the average of that of the working-class in general.
{149b}  And Dr. Hawkins {149c} says:

   "An estimate of sexual morality cannot readily be reduced to figures;
   but if I may trust my own observations and the general opinion of
   those with whom I have spoken, as well as the whole tenor of the
   testimony furnished me, the aspect of the influence of factory life
   upon the morality of the youthful female population is most
   depressing."

It is, besides, a matter of course that factory servitude, like any
other, and to an even higher degree, confers the _jus primae noctis_ upon
the master.  In this respect also the employer is sovereign over the
persons and charms of his employees.  The threat of discharge suffices to
overcome all resistance in nine cases out of ten, if not in ninety-nine
out of a hundred, in girls who, in any case, have no strong inducements
to chastity.  If the master is mean enough, and the official report
mentions several such cases, his mill is also his harem; and the fact
that not all manufacturers use their power, does not in the least change
the position of the girls.  In the beginning of manufacturing industry,
when most of the employers were upstarts without education or
consideration for the hypocrisy of society, they let nothing interfere
with the exercise of their vested rights.

To form a correct judgment of the influence of factory-work upon the
health of the female sex, it is necessary first to consider the work of
children, and then the nature of the work itself.  From the beginning of
manufacturing industry, children have been employed in mills, at first
almost exclusively by reason of the smallness of the machines, which were
later enlarged.  Even children from the workhouses were employed in
multitudes, being rented out for a number of years to the manufacturers
as apprentices.  They were lodged, fed, and clothed in common, and were,
of course, completely the slaves of their masters, by whom they were
treated with the utmost recklessness and barbarity.  As early as 1796,
the public objection to this revolting system found such vigorous
expression through Dr. Percival and Sir Robert Peel (father of the
Cabinet Minister, and himself a cotton manufacturer), that in 1802
Parliament passed an Apprentices' Bill, by which the most crying evils
were removed.  Gradually the increasing competition of free workpeople
crowded out the whole apprentice system; factories were built in cities,
machinery was constructed on a larger scale, and workrooms were made more
airy and wholesome; gradually, too, more work was found for adults and
young persons.  The number of children in the mills diminished somewhat,
and the age at which they began to work rose a little; few children under
eight or nine years were now employed.  Later, as we shall see, the power
of the State intervened several times to protect them from the
money-greed of the bourgeoisie.

The great mortality among children of the working-class, and especially
among those of the factory operatives, is proof enough of the unwholesome
conditions under which they pass their first year.  These influences are
at work, of course, among the children who survive, but not quite so
powerfully as upon those who succumb.  The result in the most favourable
case is a tendency to disease, or some check in development, and
consequent less than normal vigour of the constitution.  A nine years old
child of a factory operative that has grown up in want, privation, and
changing conditions, in cold and damp, with insufficient clothing and
unwholesome dwellings, is far from having the working force of a child
brought up under healthier conditions.  At nine years of age it is sent
into the mill to work 6.5 hours (formerly 8, earlier still, 12 to 14,
even 16 hours) daily, until the thirteenth year; then twelve hours until
the eighteenth year.  The old enfeebling influences continue, while the
work is added to them.  It is not to be denied that a child of nine
years, even an operative's child, can hold out through 6.5 hours' daily
work, without any one being able to trace visible bad results in its
development directly to this cause; but in no case can its presence in
the damp, heavy air of the factory, often at once warm and wet,
contribute to good health; and, in any case, it is unpardonable to
sacrifice to the greed of an unfeeling bourgeoisie the time of children
which should be devoted solely to their physical and mental development,
withdraw them from school and the fresh air, in order to wear them out
for the benefit of the manufacturers.  The bourgeoisie says: "If we do
not employ the children in the mills, they only remain under conditions
unfavourable to their development;" and this is true, on the whole.  But
what does this mean if it is not a confession that the bourgeoisie first
places the children of the working-class under unfavourable conditions,
and then exploits these bad conditions for its own benefit, appeals to
that which is as much its own fault as the factory system, excuses the
sin of to-day with the sin of yesterday?  And if the Factory Act did not
in some measure fetter their hands, how this "humane," this "benevolent"
bourgeoisie, which has built its factories solely for the good of the
working-class, would take care of the interests of these workers!  Let us
hear how they acted before the factory inspector was at their heels.
Their own admitted testimony shall convict them in the report of the
Factories' Inquiry Commission of 1833.

The report of the Central Commission relates that the manufacturers began
to employ children rarely of five years, often of six, very often of
seven, usually of eight to nine years; that the working-day often lasted
fourteen to sixteen hours, exclusive of meals and intervals; that the
manufacturers permitted overlookers to flog and maltreat children, and
often took an active part in so doing themselves.  One case is related of
a Scotch manufacturer, who rode after a sixteen years old runaway, forced
him to return running after the employer as fast as the master's horse
trotted, and beat him the whole way with a long whip. {151}  In the large
towns where the operatives resisted more vigorously, such things
naturally happened less often.  But even this long working-day failed to
satisfy the greed of the capitalists.  Their aim was to make the capital
invested in the building and machinery produce the highest return, by
every available means, to make it work as actively as possible.  Hence
the manufacturers introduced the shameful system of night-work.  Some of
them employed two sets of operatives, each numerous enough to fill the
whole mill, and let one set work the twelve hours of the day, and the
other twelve hours of the night.  It is needless to picture the effect
upon the frames of young children, and even upon the health of young
persons and adults, produced by permanent loss of sleep at night, which
cannot be made good by any amount of sleep during the day.  Irritation of
the whole nervous system, with general lassitude and enfeeblement of the
entire frame, were the inevitable results, with the fostering of
temptation to drunkenness and unbridled sexual indulgence.  One
manufacturer testifies {152a} that during the two years in which night-
work was carried on in his factory, the number of illegitimate children
born was doubled, and such general demoralisation prevailed that he was
obliged to give up night-work.  Other manufacturers were yet more
barbarous, requiring many hands to work thirty to forty hours at a
stretch, several times a week, letting them get a couple of hours sleep
only, because the night-shift was not complete, but calculated to replace
a part of the operatives only.

The reports of the Commission touching this barbarism surpass everything
that is known to me in this line.  Such infamies, as are here related,
are nowhere else to be found--yet we shall see that the bourgeoisie
constantly appeals to the testimony of the Commission as being in its own
favour.  The consequences of these cruelties became evident quickly
enough.  The Commissioners mention a crowd of cripples who appeared
before them, who clearly owed their distortion to the long working-hours.
This distortion usually consists of a curving of the spinal column and
legs, and is described as follows by Francis Sharp, M.R.C.S., of Leeds:
{152b}

   "I never saw the peculiar bending of the lower ends of the thigh bones
   before I came to Leeds.  At first I thought it was rachitis, but I was
   soon led to change my opinion in consequence of the mass of patients
   who presented themselves at the hospital, and the appearances of the
   disease at an age (from the fourteenth to the eighteenth year) in
   which children are usually not subject to rachitis, as well as by the
   circumstance that the malady had first appeared after children began
   to work in the mills.  Thus far I have seen about a hundred such
   cases, and can, most decidedly, express the opinion that they are the
   consequences of overwork.  So far as I know they were all mill
   children, and themselves attributed the evil to this cause.  The
   number of cases of curvature of the spine which have fallen under my
   observation, and which were evidently consequent upon too protracted
   standing, was not less than three hundred."

Precisely similar is the testimony of Dr. Ray, for eighteen years
physician in the hospital in Leeds: {153a}

   "Malformations of the spine are very frequent among mill-hands; some
   of them consequent upon mere overwork, others the effect of long work
   upon constitutions originally feeble, or weakened by bad food.
   Deformities seem even more frequent than these diseases; the knees
   were bent inward, the ligaments very often relaxed and enfeebled, and
   the long bones of the legs bent.  The thick ends of these long bones
   were especially apt to be bent and disproportionately developed, and
   these patients came from the factories in which long work-hours were
   of frequent occurrence."

Surgeons Beaumont and Sharp, of Bradford, bear the same testimony.  The
reports of Drinkwater, Power, and Dr. Loudon contain a multitude of
examples of such distortions, and those of Tufnell and Sir David Barry,
which are less directed to this point, give single examples. {153b}  The
Commissioners for Lancashire, Cowell, Tufnell, and Hawkins, have almost
wholly neglected this aspect of the physiological results of the factory
system, though this district rivals Yorkshire in the number of cripples.
I have seldom traversed Manchester without meeting three or four of them,
suffering from precisely the same distortions of the spinal columns and
legs as that described, and I have often been able to observe them
closely.  I know one personally who corresponds exactly with the
foregoing description of Dr. Ray, and who got into this condition in Mr.
Douglas' factory in Pendleton, an establishment which enjoys an
unenviable notoriety among the operatives by reason of the former long
working periods continued night after night.  It is evident, at a glance,
whence the distortions of these cripples come; they all look exactly
alike.  The knees are bent inward and backwards, the ankles deformed and
thick, and the spinal column often bent forwards or to one side.  But the
crown belongs to the philanthropic manufacturers of the Macclesfield silk
district.  They employed the youngest children of all, even from five to
six years of age.  In the supplementary testimony of Commissioner
Tufnell, I find the statement of a certain factory manager Wright, both
of whose sisters were most shamefully crippled, and who had once counted
the cripples in several streets, some of them the cleanest and neatest
streets of Macclesfield.  He found in Townley Street ten, George Street
five, Charlotte Street four, Watercots fifteen, Bank Top three, Lord
Street seven, Mill Lane twelve, Great George Street two, in the workhouse
two, Park Green one, Peckford Street two, whose families all unanimously
declared that the cripples had become such in consequence of overwork in
the silk-twisting mills.  One boy is mentioned so crippled as not to be
able to go upstairs, and girls deformed in back and hips.

Other deformities also have proceeded from this overwork, especially
flattening of the foot, which Sir D. Barry {154a} frequently observed, as
did the physicians and surgeons in Leeds. {154b}  In cases, in which a
stronger constitution, better food, and other more favourable
circumstances enabled the young operative to resist this effect of a
barbarous exploitation, we find, at least, pain in the back, hips, and
legs, swollen joints, varicose veins, and large, persistent ulcers in the
thighs and calves.  These affections are almost universal among the
operatives.  The reports of Stuart, Mackintosh, and Sir D. Barry contain
hundreds of examples; indeed, they know almost no operative who did not
suffer from some of these affections; and in the remaining reports, the
occurrence of the same phenomena is attested by many physicians.  The
reports covering Scotland place it beyond all doubt, that a working-day
of thirteen hours, even for men and women from eighteen to twenty-two
years of age, produces at least these consequences, both in the
flax-spinning mills of Dundee and Dunfermline, and in the cotton mills of
Glasgow and Lanark.

All these affections are easily explained by the nature of factory-work,
which is, as the manufacturers say, very "light," and precisely by reason
of its lightness, more enervating than any other.  The operatives have
little to do, but must stand the whole time.  Any one who sits down, say
upon a window-ledge or a basket, is fined, and this perpetual upright
position, this constant mechanical pressure of the upper portions of the
body upon spinal column, hips, and legs, inevitably produces the results
mentioned.  This standing is not required by the work itself, and at
Nottingham chairs have been introduced, with the result that these
affections disappeared, and the operatives ceased to object to the length
of the working-day.  But in a factory where the operative works solely
for the bourgeois, and has small interest in doing his work well, he
would probably use the seats more than would be agreeable and profitable
to the manufacturer; and in order that somewhat less raw material may be
spoiled for the bourgeois, the operative must sacrifice health and
strength. {155}  This long protracted upright position, with the bad
atmosphere prevalent in the mills, entails, besides the deformities
mentioned, a marked relaxation of all vital energies, and, in
consequence, all sorts of other affections general rather than local.  The
atmosphere of the factories is, as a rule, at once damp and warm,
unusually warmer than is necessary, and, when the ventilation is not
_very_ good, impure, heavy, deficient in oxygen, filled with dust and the
smell of the machine oil, which almost everywhere smears the floor, sinks
into it, and becomes rancid.  The operatives are lightly clad by reason
of the warmth, and would readily take cold in case of irregularity of the
temperature; a draught is distasteful to them, the general enervation
which gradually takes possession of all the physical functions diminishes
the animal warmth: this must be replaced from without, and nothing is
therefore more agreeable to the operative than to have all the doors and
windows closed, and to stay in his warm factory-air.  Then comes the
sudden change of temperature on going out into the cold and wet or frosty
atmosphere, without the means of protection from the rain, or of changing
wet clothing for dry, a circumstance which perpetually produces colds.
And when one reflects that, with all this, not one single muscle of the
body is really exercised, really called into activity, except perhaps
those of the legs; that nothing whatsoever counteracts the enervating,
relaxing tendency of all these conditions; that every influence is
wanting which might give the muscles strength, the fibres elasticity and
consistency; that from youth up, the operative is deprived of all fresh
air recreation, it is impossible to wonder at the almost unanimous
testimony of the physicians in the Factories' Report, that they find a
great lack of ability to resist disease, a general depression in vital
activity, a constant relaxation of the mental and physical powers.  Let
us hear Sir D. Barry first: {156}

   "The unfavourable influences of mill-work upon the hands are the
   following: (1) The inevitable necessity of forcing their mental and
   bodily effort to keep pace with a machine moved by a uniform and
   unceasing motive power.  (2) Continuance in an upright position during
   unnaturally long and quickly recurring periods.  (3) Loss of sleep in
   consequence of too long working-hours, pain in the legs, and general
   physical derangement.  To these are often added low, crowded, dusty,
   or damp workrooms, impure air, a high temperature, and constant
   perspiration.  Hence the boys especially very soon and with but few
   exceptions, lose the rosy freshness of childhood, and become paler and
   thinner than other boys.  Even the hand-weaver's bound boy, who sits
   before his loom with his bare feet resting upon the clay-floor,
   retains a fresher appearance, because he occasionally goes into the
   fresh air for a time.  But the mill child has not a moment free except
   for meals, and never goes into the fresh air except on its way to
   them.  All adult male spinners are pale and thin, suffer from
   capricious appetite and indigestion; and as they are all trained in
   the mills from their youth up, and there are very few tall, athletic
   men among them, the conclusion is justified that their occupation is
   very unfavourable for the development of the male constitution;
   females bear this work far better."  (Very naturally.  But we shall
   see that they have their own diseases.)

So, too, Power: {157a}

   "I can bear witness that the factory system in Bradford has engendered
   a multitude of cripples, and that the effect of long continued labour
   upon the physique is apparent, not alone in actual deformity, but
   also, and much more generally, in stunted growth, relaxation of the
   muscles, and delicacy of the whole frame."

So, too, F. Sharp, in Leeds, the surgeon {157b} already quoted:

   "When I moved from Scarborough to Leeds, I was at once struck by the
   fact that the general appearance of the children was much paler, and
   their fibre less vigorous here than in Scarborough and its environs.  I
   saw, too, that many children were exceptionally small for their age.  I
   have met with numberless cases of scrofula, lung trouble, mesenteric
   affections, and indigestion, concerning which I, as a medical man,
   have no doubt that they arose from mill work.  I believe that the
   nervous energy of the body is weakened by the long hours, and the
   foundation of many diseases laid.  If people from the country were not
   constantly coming in, the race of mill-hands would soon be wholly
   degenerate."

So, too, Beaumont, surgeon in Bradford:

   "To my thinking, the system, according to which work is done in the
   mills here, produces a peculiar relaxation of the whole organism, and
   thereby makes children in the highest degree susceptible to epidemic,
   as well as to incidental illness.  I regard the absence of all
   appropriate regulations for ventilation and cleanliness in the mills
   very decidedly as the chief cause of that peculiar tendency or
   susceptibility to morbid affections which I have so frequently met in
   my practice."

Similar testimony is borne by Dr. Ray:

   (1)  "I have had opportunity of observing the effects of the factory
   system upon the health of children under the most favourable
   circumstances (in Wood's mill, in Bradford, the best arranged of the
   district, in which he was factory surgeon). (2)  These effects are
   decidedly, and to a very great extent, injurious, even under these
   most favourable circumstances. (3)  In the year 1842, three-fifths of
   all the children employed in Wood's mill were treated by me. (4)  The
   worst effect is not the predominance of deformities, but of enfeebled
   and morbid constitutions. (5)  All this is greatly improved since the
   working-hours of children have been reduced at Wood's to ten."

The Commissioner, Dr. Loudon himself, who cites these witnesses, says:

   "In conclusion, I think it has been clearly proved that children have
   been worked a most unreasonable and cruel length of time daily, and
   that even adults have been expected to do a certain quantity of labour
   which scarcely any human being is able to endure.  The consequence is
   that many have died prematurely, and others are afflicted for life
   with defective constitutions, and the fear of a posterity enfeebled by
   the shattered constitution of the survivors is but too well founded,
   from a physiological point of view."

And, finally, Dr. Hawkins, in speaking of Manchester:

   "I believe that most travellers are struck by the lowness of stature,
   the leanness and the paleness which present themselves so commonly to
   the eye at Manchester, and above all, among the factory classes.  I
   have never been in any town in Great Britain, nor in Europe, in which
   degeneracy of form and colour from the national standard has been so
   obvious.  Among the married women all the characteristic peculiarities
   of the English wife are conspicuously wanting.  I must confess that
   all the boys and girls brought before me from the Manchester mills had
   a depressed appearance, and were very pale.  In the expression of
   their faces lay nothing of the usual mobility, liveliness, and
   cheeriness of youth.  Many of them told me that they felt not the
   slightest inclination to play out of doors on Saturday and Sunday, but
   preferred to be quiet at home."

I add, at once, another passage of Hawkins' report, which only half
belongs here, but may be quoted here as well as anywhere else:

   "Intemperance, excess, and want of providence are the chief faults of
   the factory population, and these evils may be readily traced to the
   habits which are formed under the present system, and almost
   inevitably arise from it.  It is universally admitted that
   indigestion, hypochondria, and general debility affect this class to a
   very great extent.  After twelve hours of monotonous toil, it is but
   natural to look about for a stimulant of one sort or another; but when
   the above-mentioned diseased conditions are added to the customary
   weariness, people will quickly and repeatedly take refuge in
   spirituous liquors."

For all this testimony of the physicians and commissioners, the report
itself offers hundreds of cases of proof.  That the growth of young
operatives is stunted, by their work, hundreds of statements testify;
among others, Cowell gives the weight of 46 youths of 17 years of age,
from one Sunday school, of whom 26 employed in mills, averaged 104.5
pounds, and 20 not employed in mills, 117.7 pounds.  One of the largest
manufacturers of Manchester, leader of the opposition against the working-
men, I think Robert Hyde Greg himself, said, on one occasion, that if
things went on as at present, the operatives of Lancashire would soon be
a race of pigmies. {159a}  A recruiting officer {159b} testified that
operatives are little adapted for military service, looked thin and
nervous, and were frequently rejected by the surgeons as unfit.  In
Manchester he could hardly get men of five feet eight inches; they were
usually only five feet six to seven, whereas in the agricultural
districts, most of the recruits were five feet eight.

The men wear out very early in consequence of the conditions under which
they live and work.  Most of them are unfit for work at forty years, a
few hold out to forty-five, almost none to fifty years of age.  This is
caused not only by the general enfeeblement of the frame, but also very
often by a failure of the sight, which is a result of mule-spinning, in
which the operative is obliged to fix his gaze upon a long row of fine,
parallel threads, and so greatly to strain the sight.

Of 1,600 operatives employed in several factories in Harpur and Lanark,
but 10 were over 45 years of age; of 22,094 operatives in diverse
factories in Stockport and Manchester, but 143 were over 45 years old.  Of
these 143, 16 were retained as a special favour, and one was doing the
work of a child.  A list of 131 spinners contained but seven over 45
years, and yet the whole 131 were rejected by the manufacturers, to whom
they applied for work, as "too old," and were without means of support by
reason of old age!  Mr. Ashworth, a large manufacturer, admits in a
letter to Lord Ashley, that, towards the fortieth year, the spinners can
no longer prepare the required quantity of yarn, and are therefore
"sometimes" discharged; he calls operatives forty years of age "old
people!"  Commissioner Mackintosh expresses himself in the same way in
the report of 1833:

   "Although I was prepared for it from the way the children are
   employed, I still found it difficult to believe the statements of the
   older hands as to their ages; they age so very early."

Surgeon Smellie, of Glasgow, who treated operatives chiefly, says that
forty years is old age for them. {160a}  And similar evidence may be
found elsewhere. {160b}  In Manchester, this premature old age among the
operatives is so universal that almost every man of forty would be taken
for ten to fifteen years older, while the prosperous classes, men as well
as women, preserve their appearance exceedingly well if they do not drink
too heavily.

The influence of factory-work upon the female physique also is marked and
peculiar.  The deformities entailed by long hours of work are much more
serious among women.  Protracted work frequently causes deformities of
the pelvis, partly in the shape of abnormal position and development of
the hip bones, partly of malformation of the lower portion of the spinal
column.

   "Although," says Dr. Loudon, in his report, "no example of
   malformation of the pelvis and of some other affections came under my
   notice, these things are nevertheless so common, that every physician
   must regard them as probable consequences of such working-hours, and
   as vouched for besides by men of the highest medical credibility."

That factory operatives undergo more difficult confinement than other
women is testified to by several midwives and accoucheurs, and also that
they are more liable to miscarriage. {161}  Moreover, they suffer from
the general enfeeblement common to all operatives, and, when pregnant,
continue to work in the factory up to the hour of delivery, because
otherwise they lose their wages and are made to fear that they may be
replaced if they stop away too soon.  It frequently happens that women
are at work one evening and delivered the next morning, and the case is
none too rare of their being delivered in the factory among the
machinery.  And if the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie find nothing
particularly shocking in this, their wives will perhaps admit that it is
a piece of cruelty, an infamous act of barbarism, indirectly to force a
pregnant woman to work twelve or thirteen hours daily (formerly still
longer), up to the day of her delivery, in a standing position, with
frequent stoopings.  But this is not all.  If these women are not obliged
to resume work within two weeks, they are thankful, and count themselves
fortunate.  Many come back to the factory after eight, and even after
three to four days, to resume full work.  I once heard a manufacturer ask
an overlooker: "Is so and so not back yet?"  "No."  "How long since she
was confined?"  "A week."  "She might surely have been back long ago.
That one over there only stays three days."  Naturally, fear of being
discharged, dread of starvation drives her to the factory in spite of her
weakness, in defiance of her pain.  The interest of the manufacturer will
not brook that his employees stay at home by reason of illness; they must
not be ill, they must not venture to lie still through a long
confinement, or he must stop his machinery or trouble his supreme head
with a temporary change of arrangements, and rather than do this, he
discharges his people when they begin to be ill.  Listen: {162a}

   "A girl feels very ill, can scarcely do her work.  Why does she not
   ask permission to go home?  Ah! the master is very particular, and if
   we are away half a day, we risk being sent away altogether."

Or Sir D. Barry: {162b}

   "Thomas McDurt, workman, has slight fever.  Cannot stay at home longer
   than four days, because he would fear of losing his place."

And so it goes on in almost all the factories.  The employment of young
girls produces all sorts of irregularities during the period of
development.  In some, especially those who are better fed, the heat of
the factories hastens this process, so that in single cases, girls of
thirteen and fourteen are wholly mature.  Robertson, whom I have already
cited (mentioned in the Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report as the
"eminent" gynaecologist of Manchester), relates in the North of England
_Medical and Surgical Journal_, that he had seen a girl of eleven years
who was not only a wholly developed woman, but pregnant, and that it was
by no means rare in Manchester for women to be confined at fifteen years
of age.  In such cases, the influence of the warmth of the factories is
the same as that of a tropical climate, and, as in such climates, the
abnormally early development revenges itself by correspondingly premature
age and debility.  On the other hand, retarded development of the female
constitution occurs, the breasts mature late or not at all. {162c}
Menstruation first appears in the seventeenth or Eighteenth, sometimes in
the twentieth year, and is often wholly wanting. {163a}  Irregular
menstruation, coupled with great pain and numerous affections, especially
with anaemia, is very frequent, as the medical reports unanimously state.

Children of such mothers, particularly of those who are obliged to work
during pregnancy, cannot be vigorous.  They are, on the contrary,
described in the report, especially in Manchester, as very feeble; and
Barry alone asserts that they are healthy, but says further, that in
Scotland, where his inspection lay, almost no married women worked in
factories.  Moreover, most of the factories there are in the country
(with the exception of Glasgow), a circumstance which contributes greatly
to the invigoration of the children.  The operatives' children in the
neighbourhood of Manchester are nearly all thriving and rosy, while those
within the city look pale and scrofulous; but with the ninth year the
colour vanishes suddenly, because all are then sent into the factories,
when it soon becomes impossible to distinguish the country from the city
children.

But besides all this, there are some branches of factory-work which have
an especially injurious effect.  In many rooms of the cotton and flax-
spinning mills, the air is filled with fibrous dust, which produces chest
affections, especially among workers in the carding and combing-rooms.
Some constitutions can bear it, some cannot; but the operative has no
choice.  He must take the room in which he finds work, whether his chest
is sound or not.  The most common effects of this breathing of dust are
blood-spitting, hard, noisy breathing, pains in the chest, coughs,
sleeplessness--in short, all the symptoms of asthma ending in the worst
cases in consumption. {163b}  Especially unwholesome is the wet spinning
of linen-yarn which is carried on by young girls and boys.  The water
spirts over them from the spindle, so that the front of their clothing is
constantly wet through to the skin; and there is always water standing on
the floor.  This is the case to a less degree in the doubling-rooms of
the cotton mills, and the result is a constant succession of colds and
affections of the chest.  A hoarse, rough voice is common to all
operatives, but especially to wet spinners and doublers.  Stuart,
Mackintosh, and Sir D. Barry express themselves in the most vigorous
terms as to the unwholesomeness of this work, and the small consideration
shown by most of the manufacturers for the health of the girls who do it.
Another effect of flax-spinning is a peculiar deformity of the shoulder,
especially a projection of the right shoulder-blade, consequent upon the
nature of the work.  This sort of spinning and the throstle-spinning of
cotton frequently produce diseases of the knee-pan, which is used to
check the spindle during the joining of broken threads.  The frequent
stooping and the bending to the low machines common to both these
branches of work have, in general, a stunting effect upon the growth of
the operative.  In the throstle-room of the cotton mill at Manchester, in
which I was employed, I do not remember to have seen one single tall,
well-built girl; they were all short, dumpy, and badly-formed, decidedly
ugly in the whole development of the figure.  But apart from all these
diseases and malformations, the limbs of the operatives suffer in still
another way.  The work between the machinery gives rise to multitudes of
accidents of more or less serious nature, which have for the operative
the secondary effect of unfitting him for his work more or less
completely.  The most common accident is the squeezing off of a single
joint of a finger, somewhat less common the loss of the whole finger,
half or a whole hand, an arm, etc., in the machinery.  Lockjaw very often
follows, even upon the lesser among these injuries, and brings death with
it.  Besides the deformed persons, a great number of maimed ones may be
seen going about in Manchester; this one has lost an arm or a part of
one, that one a foot, the third half a leg; it is like living in the
midst of an army just returned from a campaign.  But the most dangerous
portion of the machinery is the strapping which conveys motive power from
the shaft to the separate machines, especially if it contains buckles,
which, however, are rarely used now.  Whoever is seized by the strap is
carried up with lightning speed, thrown against the ceiling above and
floor below with such force that there is rarely a whole bone left in the
body, and death follows instantly.  Between June 12th and August 3rd,
1843, the _Manchester Guardian_ reported the following serious accidents
(the trifling ones it does not notice): June 12th, a boy died in
Manchester of lockjaw, caused by his hand being crushed between wheels.
June 16th, a youth in Saddleworth seized by a wheel and carried away with
it; died, utterly mangled.  June 29th, a young man at Green Acres Moor,
near Manchester, at work in a machine shop, fell under the grindstone,
which broke two of his ribs and lacerated him terribly.  July 24th, a
girl in Oldham died, carried around fifty times by a strap; no bone
unbroken.  July 27th, a girl in Manchester seized by the blower (the
first machine that receives the raw cotton), and died of injuries
received.  August 3rd, a bobbins turner died in Dukenfield, caught in a
strap, every rib broken.  In the year 1843, the Manchester Infirmary
treated 962 cases of wounds and mutilations caused by machinery, while
the number of all other accidents within the district of the hospital was
2,426, so that for five accidents from all other causes, two were caused
by machinery.  The accidents which happened in Salford are not included
here, nor those treated by surgeons in private practice.  In such cases,
whether or not the accident unfits the victim for further work, the
employer, at best, pays the doctor, or, in very exceptional cases, he may
pay wages during treatment; what becomes of the operative afterwards, in
case he cannot work, is no concern of the employer.

The Factory Report says on this subject, that employers must be made
responsible for all cases, since children cannot take care, and adults
will take care in their own interest.  But the gentlemen who write the
report are bourgeois, and so they must contradict themselves and bring up
later all sorts of bosh on the subject of the culpable temerity of the
operatives.

The state of the case is this: If children cannot take care, the
employment of children must be forbidden.  If adults are reckless, they
must be mere over-grown children on a plane of intelligence which does
not enable them to appreciate the danger in its full scope; and who is to
blame for this but the bourgeoisie which keeps them in a condition in
which their intelligence cannot develop?  Or the machinery is
ill-arranged, and must be surrounded with fencing, to supply which falls
to the share of the bourgeoisie.  Or the operative is under inducements
which outweigh the threatened danger; he must work rapidly to earn his
wages, has no time to take care, and for this, too, the bourgeoisie is to
blame.  Many accidents happen, for instance, while the operatives are
cleaning machinery in motion.  Why?  Because the bourgeois would
otherwise oblige the worker to clean the machinery during the free hours
while it is not going, and the worker naturally is not disposed to
sacrifice any part of his free time.  Every free hour is so precious to
the worker that he often risks his life twice a week rather than
sacrifice one of them to the bourgeois.  Let the employer take from
working-hours the time required for cleaning the machinery, and it will
never again occur to an operative to clean machinery in motion.  In
short, from whatever point of view, the blame falls ultimately on the
manufacturer, and of him should be required, at the very least, life-long
support of the incapacitated operative, and support of the victim's
family in case death follows the accident.  In the earliest period of
manufacture, the accidents were much more numerous in proportion than
now, for the machinery was inferior, smaller, more crowded, and almost
never fenced.  But the number is still large enough, as the foregoing
cases prove, to arouse grave question as to a state of things which
permits so many deformities and mutilations for the benefit of a single
class, and plunges so many industrious working-people into want and
starvation by reason of injuries undergone in the service and through the
fault of the bourgeoisie.

A pretty list of diseases engendered purely by the hateful money greed of
the manufacturers!  Women made unfit for childbearing, children deformed,
men enfeebled, limbs crushed, whole generations wrecked, afflicted with
disease and infirmity, purely to fill the purses of the bourgeoisie.  And
when one reads of the barbarism of single cases, how children are seized
naked in bed by the overlookers, and driven with blows and kicks to the
factory, their clothing over their arms, {167a} how their sleepiness is
driven off with blows, how they fall asleep over their work nevertheless,
how one poor child sprang up, still asleep, at the call of the
overlooker, and mechanically went through the operations of its work
after its machine was stopped; when one reads how children, too tired to
go home, hide away in the wool in the drying-room to sleep there, and
could only be driven out of the factory with straps; how many hundreds
came home so tired every night, that they could eat no supper for
sleepiness and want of appetite, that their parents found them kneeling
by the bedside, where they had fallen asleep during their prayers; when
one reads all this and a hundred other villainies and infamies in this
one report, all testified to on oath, confirmed by several witnesses,
deposed by men whom the commissioners themselves declare trustworthy;
when one reflects that this is a Liberal report, a bourgeois report, made
for the purpose of reversing the previous Tory report, and rehabilitating
the pureness of heart of the manufacturers, that the commissioners
themselves are on the side of the bourgeoisie, and report all these
things against their own will, how can one be otherwise than filled with
wrath and resentment against a class which boasts of philanthropy and
self-sacrifice, while its one object is to fill its purse _a tout prix_?
Meanwhile, let us listen to the bourgeoisie speaking through the mouth of
its chosen apostle, Dr. Ure, who relates in his "Philosophy of
Manufactures" {167b} that the workers have been told that their wages
bore no proportion to their sacrifices, the good understanding between
masters and men being thus disturbed.  Instead of this, the working-men
should have striven to recommend themselves by attention and industry,
and should have rejoiced in the prosperity of their masters.  They would
then become overseers, superintendents, and finally partners, and would
thus--(Oh!  Wisdom, thou speakest as the dove!)--"have increased at the
same time the demand for their companions' labour in the market!"

   "Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions
   resulting from erroneous views among the operatives, the factory
   system would have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially."
   {168a}

Hereupon follows a long Jeremiad upon the spirit of resistance of the
operatives, and on the occasion of a strike of the best paid workers, the
fine spinners, the following naive observation: {168b}

   "In fact, it was their high wages which enabled them to maintain a
   stipendiary committee in affluence, and to pamper themselves into
   nervous ailments, by a diet too rich and exciting for their indoor
   employments."

Let us hear how the bourgeois describes the work of children: {168c}

   "I have visited many factories, both in Manchester and in the
   surrounding districts, during a period of several months, entering the
   spinning-rooms unexpectedly, and often alone, at different times of
   the day, and I never saw a single instance of corporal chastisement
   inflicted on a child; nor, indeed, did I ever see children in
   ill-humour.  They seemed to be always cheerful and alert; taking
   pleasure in the light play of their muscles, enjoying the mobility
   natural to their age.  The scene of industry, so far from exciting sad
   emotions, in my mind, was always exhilerating.  It was delightful to
   observe the nimbleness with which they pieced broken ends, as the mule
   carriage began to recede from the fixed roller beam, and to see them
   at leisure, after a few seconds' exercise of their tiny fingers, to
   amuse themselves in any attitude they chose, till the stretch and
   winding on were once more completed.  The work of these lively elves
   seemed to resemble a sport, in which habit gave them a pleasing
   dexterity.  Conscious of their skill, they were delighted to show it
   off to any stranger.  As to exhaustion by the day's work, they evinced
   no trace of it on emerging from the mill in the evening; for they
   immediately began to skip about any neighbouring playground, and to
   commence their little games with the same alacrity as boys issuing
   from a school."

Naturally!  As though the immediate movement of every muscle were not an
urgent necessity for frames grown at once stiff and relaxed!  But Ure
should have waited to see whether this momentary excitement had not
subsided after a couple of minutes.  And besides, Ure could see this
whole performance only in the afternoon after five or six hours' work,
but not in the evening!  As to the health of the operatives, the
bourgeois has the boundless impudence to cite the report of 1833 just
quoted in a thousand places, as testimony for the excellent health of
these people; to try to prove by detached and garbled quotations that no
trace of scrofula can be found among them, and, what is quite true, that
the factory system frees them from all acute diseases, (that they have
every variety of chronic affection instead he naturally conceals).  To
explain the impudence with which our friend Ure palms off the grossest
falsehoods upon the English public, it must be known that the report
consists of three large folio volumes, which it never occurs to a well-
fed English bourgeois to study through.  Let us hear further how he
expresses himself as to the Factory Act of 1834, passed by the Liberal
bourgeoisie, and imposing only the most meagre limitations upon the
manufacturers, as we shall see.  This law, especially its compulsory
education clause, he calls an absurd and despotic measure directed
against the manufacturers, through which all children under twelve years
of age have been thrown out of employment; and with what results?  The
children thus discharged from their light and useful occupation receive
no education whatsoever; cast out from the warm spinning-room into a cold
world, they subsist only by begging and stealing, a life in sad contrast
with their steadily improving condition in the factory and in Sunday
school.  Under the mask of philanthropy, this law intensifies the
sufferings of the poor, and will greatly restrict the conscientious
manufacturer in his useful work, if, indeed, it does not wholly stop him.
{169}

The ruinous influence of the factory system began at an early day to
attract general attention.  We have already alluded to the Apprentices'
Act of 1802.  Later, towards 1817, Robert Owen, then a manufacturer in
New Lanark, in Scotland, afterwards founder of English Socialism, began
to call the attention of the Government, by memorials and petitions, to
the necessity of legislative guarantees for the health of the operatives,
and especially of children.  The late Sir Robert Peel and other
philanthropists united with him, and gradually secured the Factory Acts
of 1818, 1825, and 1831, of which the first two were never enforced, and
the last only here and there.  This law of 1831, based upon the motion of
Sir J. C. Hobhouse, provided that in cotton mills no one under twenty-one
should be employed between half-past seven at night and half-past five in
the morning; and that in all factories young persons under eighteen
should work no longer than twelve hours daily, and nine hours on
Saturday.  But since operatives could not testify against their masters
without being discharged, this law helped matters very little.  In the
great cities, where the operatives were more restive, the larger
manufacturers came to an agreement among themselves to obey the law; but
even there, there were many who, like the employers in the country, did
not trouble themselves about it.  Meanwhile, the demand for a ten hours'
law had become lively among the operatives; that is, for a law which
should forbid all operatives under eighteen years of age to work longer
than ten hours daily; the Trades Unions, by their agitation, made this
demand general throughout the manufacturing population; the philanthropic
section of the Tory party, then led by Michael Sadler, seized upon the
plan, and brought it before Parliament.  Sadler obtained a parliamentary
committee for the investigation of the factory system, and this committee
reported in 1832.  Its report was emphatically partisan, composed by
strong enemies of the factory system, for party ends.  Sadler permitted
himself to be betrayed by his noble enthusiasm into the most distorted
and erroneous statements, drew from his witnesses by the very form of his
questions, answers which contained the truth, but truth in a perverted
form.  The manufacturers themselves, incensed at a report which
represented them as monsters, now demanded an official investigation;
they knew that an exact report must, in this case, be advantageous to
them; they knew that Whigs, genuine bourgeois, were at the helm, with
whom they were upon good terms, whose principles were opposed to any
restriction upon manufacture.  They obtained a commission, in due order,
composed of Liberal bourgeois, whose report I have so often cited.  This
comes somewhat nearer the truth than Sadler's, but its deviations
therefrom are in the opposite direction.  On every page it betrays
sympathy with the manufacturers, distrust of the Sadler report,
repugnance to the working-men agitating independently and the supporters
of the Ten Hours' Bill.  It nowhere recognises the right of the working-
man to a life worthy of a human being, to independent activity, and
opinions of his own.  It reproaches the operatives that in sustaining the
Ten Hours' Bill they thought, not of the children only, but of themselves
as well; it calls the working-men engaged in the agitation demagogues,
ill-intentioned, malicious, etc., is written, in short, on the side of
the bourgeoisie; and still it cannot whitewash the manufacturers, and
still it leaves such a mass of infamies upon the shoulders of the
employers, that even after this report, the agitation for the Ten Hours'
Bill, the hatred against the manufacturers, and the committee's severest
epithets applied to them are all fully justified.  But there was the one
difference, that whereas the Sadler report accuses the manufacturers of
open, undisguised brutality, it now became evident that this brutality
was chiefly carried on under the mask of civilisation and humanity.  Yet
Dr. Hawkins, the medical commissioner for Lancashire, expresses himself
decidedly in favour of the Ten Hours' Bill in the opening lines of his
report, and Commissioner Mackintosh explains that his own report does not
contain the whole truth, because it is very difficult to induce the
operatives to testify against their employers, and because the
manufacturers, besides being forced into greater concessions towards
their operatives by the excitement among the latter, are often prepared
for the inspection of the factories, have them swept, the speed of the
machinery reduced, etc.  In Lancashire especially they resorted to the
device of bringing the overlookers of workrooms before the commissioners,
and letting them testify as working-men to the humanity of the employers,
the wholesome effects of the work, and the indifference, if not the
hostility of the operatives, towards the Ten Hours' Bill.  But these are
not genuine working-men; they are deserters from their class, who have
entered the service of the bourgeoisie for better pay, and fight in the
interests of the capitalists against the workers.  Their interest is that
of the capitalists, and they are, therefore, almost more hated by the
workers than the manufacturers themselves.

And yet this report suffices wholly to exhibit the most shameful
recklessness of the manufacturing bourgeoisie towards its employees, the
whole infamy of the industrial exploiting system in its full inhumanity.
Nothing is more revolting than to compare the long register of diseases
and deformities engendered by overwork, in this report, with the cold,
calculating political economy of the manufacturers, by which they try to
prove that they, and with them all England, must go to ruin, if they
should be forbidden to cripple so and so many children every year.  The
language of Dr. Ure alone, which I have quoted, would be yet more
revolting if it were not so preposterous.

The result of this report was the Factory Act of 1834, which forbade the
employment of children under nine years of age (except in silk mills),
limited the working-hours of children between 9-13 years to 48 per week,
or 9 hours in any one day at the utmost; that of young persons from 14-18
years of age to 69 per week, or 12 on any one day as the maximum,
provided for an hour and a half as the minimum interval for meals, and
repeated the total prohibition of night-work for persons under eighteen
years of age.  Compulsory school attendance two hours daily was
prescribed for all children under fourteen years, and the manufacturer
declared punishable in case of employing children without a certificate
of age from the factory surgeon, and a certificate of school attendance
from the teacher.  As recompense, the employer was permitted to withdraw
one penny from the child's weekly earnings to pay the teacher.  Further,
surgeons and inspectors were appointed to visit the factories at all
times, take testimony of operatives on oath, and enforce the law by
prosecution before a Justice of the Peace.  This is the law against which
Dr. Ure inveighs in such unmeasured terms!

The consequence of this law, and especially of the appointment of
inspectors, was the reduction of working-hours to an average of twelve to
thirteen, and the superseding of children as far as possible.  Hereupon
some of the most crying evils disappeared almost wholly.  Deformities
arose now only in cases of weak constitution, and the effects of overwork
became much less conspicuous.  Nevertheless, enough testimony remains to
be found in the Factory Report, that the lesser evils, swelling of the
ankles, weakness and pain in the legs, hips, and back, varicose veins,
ulcers on the lower extremities, general weakness, especially of the
pelvic region, nausea, want of appetite alternating with unnatural
hunger, indigestion, hypochondria, affections of the chest in consequence
of the dust and foul atmosphere of the factories, etc. etc., all occur
among employees subject to the provisions of Sir J. C. Hobhouse's law (of
1831), which prescribes twelve to thirteen hours as the maximum.  The
reports from Glasgow and Manchester are especially worthy of attention in
this respect.  These evils remained too, after the law of 1834, and
continue to undermine the health of the working-class to this day.  Care
has been taken to give the brutal profit-greed of the bourgeoisie a
hypocritical, civilised form, to restrain the manufacturers through the
arm of the law from too conspicuous villainies, and thus to give them a
pretext for self-complacently parading their sham philanthropy.  That is
all.  If a new commission were appointed to-day, it would find things
pretty much as before.  As to the extemporised compulsory attendance at
school, it remained wholly a dead letter, since the Government failed to
provide good schools.  The manufacturers employed as teachers worn-out
operatives, to whom they sent the children two hours daily, thus
complying with the letter of the law; but the children learned nothing.
And even the reports of the factory inspectors, which are limited to the
scope of the inspector's duties, _i.e_., the enforcement of the Factory
Act, give data enough to justify the conclusion that the old evils
inevitably remain.  Inspectors Horner and Saunders, in their reports for
October and December, 1844, state that, in a number of branches in which
the employment of children can be dispensed with or superseded by that of
adults, the working-day is still fourteen to sixteen hours, or even
longer.  Among the operatives in these branches they found numbers of
young people who had just outgrown the provisions of the law.  Many
employers disregard the law, shorten the meal times, work children longer
than is permitted, and risk prosecution, knowing that the possible fines
are trifling in comparison with the certain profits derivable from the
offence.  Just at present especially, while business is exceptionally
brisk, they are under great temptation in this respect.

Meanwhile the agitation for the Ten Hours' Bill by no means died out
among the operatives; in 1839 it was under full headway once more, and
Sadler's place, he having died, was filled in the House of Commons by
Lord Ashley {174} and Richard Oastler, both Tories.  Oastler especially,
who carried on a constant agitation in the factory districts, and had
been active in the same way during Sadler's life, was the particular
favourite of the working-men.  They called him their "good old king,"
"the king of the factory children," and there is not a child in the
factory districts that does not know and revere him, that does not join
the procession which moves to welcome him when he enters a town.  Oastler
vigorously opposed the New Poor Law also, and was therefore imprisoned
for debt by a Mr. Thornley, on whose estate he was employed as agent, and
to whom he owed money.  The Whigs offered repeatedly to pay his debt and
confer other favours upon him if he would only give up his agitation
against the Poor Law.  But in vain; he remained in prison, whence he
published his Fleet Papers against the factory system and the Poor Law.

The Tory Government of 1841 turned its attention once more to the Factory
Acts.  The Home Secretary, Sir James Graham, proposed, in 1843, a bill
restricting the working-hours of children to six and one-half, and making
the enactments for compulsory school attendance more effective; the
principal point in this connection being a provision for better schools.
This bill was, however, wrecked by the jealousy of the dissenters; for,
although compulsory religious instruction was not extended to the
children of dissenters, the schools provided for were to be placed under
the general supervision of the Established Church, and the Bible made the
general reading-book; religion being thus made the foundation of all
instruction, whence the dissenters felt themselves threatened.  The
manufacturers and the Liberals generally united with them, the working-
men were divided by the Church question, and therefore inactive.  The
opponents of the bill, though outweighed in the great manufacturing
towns, such as Salford and Stockport, and able in others, such as
Manchester, to attack certain of its points only, for fear of the working-
men, collected nevertheless nearly two million signatures for a petition
against it, and Graham allowed himself to be so far intimidated as to
withdraw the whole bill.  The next year he omitted the school clauses,
and proposed that, instead of the previous provisions, children between
eight and thirteen years should be restricted to six and one-half hours,
and so employed as to have either the whole morning or the whole
afternoon free; that young people between thirteen and eighteen years,
and all females, should be limited to twelve hours; and that the hitherto
frequent evasions of the law should be prevented.  Hardly had he proposed
this bill, when the ten hours' agitation was begun again more vigorously
than ever.  Oastler had just then regained his liberty; a number of his
friends and a collection among the workers had paid his debt, and he
threw himself into the movement with all his might.  The defenders of the
Ten Hours' Bill in the House of Commons had increased in numbers, the
masses of petitions supporting it which poured in from all sides brought
them allies, and on March 19th, 1844, Lord Ashley carried, with a
majority of 179 to 170, a resolution that the word "Night" in the Factory
Act should express the time from six at night to six in the morning,
whereby the prohibition of night-work came to mean the limitation of
working-hours to twelve, including free hours, or ten hours of actual
work a day.  But the ministry did not agree to this.  Sir James Graham
began to threaten resignation from the Cabinet, and at the next vote on
the bill the House rejected by a small majority both ten and twelve
hours!  Graham and Peel now announced that they should introduce a new
bill, and that if this failed to pass they should resign.  The new bill
was exactly the old Twelve Hours' Bill with some changes of form, and the
same House of Commons which had rejected the principal points of this
bill in March, now swallowed it whole.  The reason of this was that most
of the supporters of the Ten Hours' Bill were Tories who let fall the
bill rather than the ministry; but be the motives what they may, the
House of Commons by its votes upon this subject, each vote reversing the
last, has brought itself into the greatest contempt among all the
workers, and proved most brilliantly the Chartists' assertion of the
necessity of its reform.  Three members, who had formerly voted against
the ministry, afterwards voted for it and rescued it.  In all the
divisions, the bulk of the opposition voted _for_ and the bulk of its own
party _against_ the ministry. {176}  The foregoing propositions of Graham
touching the employment of children six and one-half and of all other
operatives twelve hours are now legislative provisions, and by them and
by the limitation of overwork for making up time lost through breakdown
of machinery or insufficient water-power by reason of frost or drought, a
working-day of more than twelve hours has been made well-nigh impossible.
There remains, however, no doubt that, in a very short time, the Ten
Hours' Bill will really be adopted.  The manufacturers are naturally all
against it, there are perhaps not ten who are for it; they have used
every honourable and dishonourable means against this dreaded measure,
but with no other result than that of drawing down upon them the ever
deepening hatred of the working-men.  The bill will pass.  What the
working-men will do they can do, and that they will have this bill they
proved last spring.  The economic arguments of the manufacturers that a
Ten Hours' Bill would increase the cost of production and incapacitate
the English producers for competition in foreign markets, and that wages
must fall, are all _half_ true; but they prove nothing except this, that
the industrial greatness of England can be maintained only through the
barbarous treatment of the operatives, the destruction of their health,
the social, physical, and mental decay of whole generations.  Naturally,
if the Ten Hours' Bill were a final measure, it must ruin England; but
since it must inevitably bring with it other measures which must draw
England into a path wholly different from that hitherto followed, it can
only prove an advance.

Let us turn to another side of the factory system which cannot be
remedied by legislative provisions so easily as the diseases now
engendered by it.  We have already alluded in a general way to the nature
of the employment, and enough in detail to be able to draw certain
inferences from the facts given.  The supervision of machinery, the
joining of broken threads, is no activity which claims the operative's
thinking powers, yet it is of a sort which prevents him from occupying
his mind with other things.  We have seen, too, that this work affords
the muscles no opportunity for physical activity.  Thus it is, properly
speaking, not work, but tedium, the most deadening, wearing process
conceivable.  The operative is condemned to let his physical and mental
powers decay in this utter monotony, it is his mission to be bored every
day and all day long from his eighth year.  Moreover, he must not take a
moment's rest; the engine moves unceasingly; the wheels, the straps, the
spindles hum and rattle in his ears without a pause, and if he tries to
snatch one instant, there is the overlooker at his back with the book of
fines.  This condemnation to be buried alive in the mill, to give
constant attention to the tireless machine is felt as the keenest torture
by the operatives, and its action upon mind and body is in the long run
stunting in the highest degree.  There is no better means of inducing
stupefaction than a period of factory work, and if the operatives have,
nevertheless, not only rescued their intelligence, but cultivated and
sharpened it more than other working-men, they have found this possible
only in rebellion against their fate and against the bourgeoisie, the
sole subject on which under all circumstances they can think and feel
while at work.  Or, if this indignation against the bourgeoisie does not
become the supreme passion of the working-man, the inevitable consequence
is drunkenness and all that is generally called demoralisation.  The
physical enervation and the sickness, universal in consequence of the
factory system, were enough to induce Commissioner Hawkins to attribute
this demoralisation thereto as inevitable; how much more when mental
lassitude is added to them, and when the influences already mentioned
which tempt every working-man to demoralisation, make themselves felt
here too!  There is no cause for surprise, therefore, that in the
manufacturing towns especially, drunkenness and sexual excesses have
reached the pitch which I have already described. {178}

Further, the slavery in which the bourgeoisie holds the proletariat
chained, is nowhere more conspicuous than in the factory system.  Here
ends all freedom in law and in fact.  The operative must be in the mill
at half-past five in the morning; if he comes a couple of minutes too
late, he is fined; if he comes ten minutes too late, he is not let in
until breakfast is over, and a quarter of the day's wages is withheld,
though he loses only two and one-half hours' work out of twelve.  He must
eat, drink, and sleep at command.  For satisfying the most imperative
needs, he is vouchsafed the least possible time absolutely required by
them.  Whether his dwelling is a half-hour or a whole one removed from
the factory does not concern his employer.  The despotic bell calls him
from his bed, his breakfast, his dinner.

What a time he has of it, too, inside the factory!  Here the employer is
absolute law-giver; he makes regulations at will, changes and adds to his
codex at pleasure, and even, if he inserts the craziest stuff, the courts
say to the working-man: "You were your own master, no one forced you to
agree to such a contract if you did not wish to; but now, when you have
freely entered into it, you must be bound by it."  And so the working-man
only gets into the bargain the mockery of the Justice of the Peace who is
a bourgeois himself, and of the law which is made by the bourgeoisie.
Such decisions have been given often enough.  In October, 1844, the
operatives of Kennedy's mill, in Manchester struck.  Kennedy prosecuted
them on the strength of a regulation placarded in the mill, that at no
time more than two operatives in one room may quit work at once.  And the
court decided in his favour, giving the working-men the explanation cited
above. {179a}  And such rules as these usually are!  For instance: 1.  The
doors are closed ten minutes after work begins, and thereafter no one is
admitted until the breakfast hour; whoever is absent during this time
forfeits 3d. per loom. 2.  Every power-loom weaver detected absenting
himself at another time, while the machinery is in motion, forfeits for
each hour and each loom, 3d.  Every person who leaves the room during
working-hours, without obtaining permission from the overlooker, forfeits
3d. 3.  Weavers who fail to supply themselves with scissors forfeit, per
day, 1d. 4.  All broken shuttles, brushes, oil-cans, wheels, window
panes, etc., must be paid for by the weaver. 5.  No weaver to stop work
without giving a week's notice.  The manufacturer may dismiss any
employee without notice for bad work or improper behaviour. 6.  Every
operative detected speaking to another, singing or whistling, will be
fined 6d.; for leaving his place during working-hours, 6d. {179b}  Another
copy of factory regulations lies before me, according to which every
operative who comes three minutes too late, forfeits the wages for a
quarter of an hour, and every one who comes twenty minutes too late, for
a quarter of a day.  Every one who remains absent until breakfast
forfeits a shilling on Monday, and sixpence every other day of the week,
etc, etc.  This last is the regulation of the Phoenix Works in Jersey
Street, Manchester.  It may be said that such rules are necessary in a
great, complicated factory, in order to insure the harmonious working of
the different parts; it may be asserted that such a severe discipline is
as necessary here as in an army.  This may be so, but what sort of a
social order is it which cannot be maintained without such shameful
tyranny?  Either the end sanctifies the means, or the inference of the
badness of the end from the badness of the means is justified.  Every one
who has served as a soldier knows what it is to be subjected even for a
short time to military discipline.  But these operatives are condemned
from their ninth year to their death to live under the sword, physically
and mentally.  They are worse slaves than the negroes in America, for
they are more sharply watched, and yet it is demanded of them that they
shall live like human beings, shall think and feel like men!  Verily,
this they can do only under glowing hatred towards their oppressors, and
towards that order of things which place them in such a position, which
degrades them to machines.  But it is far more shameful yet, that
according to the universal testimony of the operatives, numbers of
manufacturers collect the fines imposed upon the operatives with the most
heartless severity, and for the purpose of piling up extra profits out of
the farthings thus extorted from the impoverished proletarians.  Leach
asserts, too, that the operatives often find the factory clock moved
forward a quarter of an hour and the doors shut, while the clerk moves
about with the fines-book inside, noting the many names of the absentees.
Leach claims to have counted ninety-five operatives thus shut out,
standing before a factory, whose clock was a quarter of an hour slower
than the town clocks at night, and a quarter of an hour faster in the
morning.  The Factory Report relates similar facts.  In one factory the
clock was set back during working-hours, so that the operatives worked
overtime without extra pay; in another, a whole quarter of an hour
overtime was worked; in a third, there were two clocks, an ordinary one
and a machine clock, which registered the revolutions of the main shaft;
if the machinery went slowly, working-hours were measured by the machine
clock until the number of revolutions due in twelve hours was reached; if
work went well, so that the number was reached before the usual working-
hours were ended, the operatives were forced to toil on to the end of the
twelfth hour.  The witness adds that he had known girls who had good
work, and who had worked overtime, who, nevertheless, betook themselves
to a life of prostitution rather than submit to this tyranny. {181a}  To
return to the fines, Leach relates having repeatedly seen women in the
last period of pregnancy fined 6d. for the offence of sitting down a
moment to rest.  Fines for bad work are wholly arbitrary; the goods are
examined in the wareroom, and the supervisor charges the fines upon a
list without even summoning the operative, who only learns that he has
been fined when the overlooker pays his wages, and the goods have perhaps
been sold, or certainly been placed beyond his reach.  Leach has in his
possession such a fines list, ten feet long, and amounting to 35 pounds
17s. 10d.  He relates that in the factory where this list was made, a new
supervisor was dismissed for fining too little, and so bringing in five
pounds too little weekly. {181b}  And I repeat that I know Leach to be a
thoroughly trustworthy man incapable of a falsehood.

But the operative is his employer's slave in still other respects.  If
his wife or daughter finds favour in the eyes of the master, a command, a
hint suffices, and she must place herself at his disposal.  When the
employer wishes to supply with signatures a petition in favour of
bourgeois interests, he need only send it to his mill.  If he wishes to
decide a Parliamentary election, he sends his enfranchised operatives in
rank and file to the polls, and they vote for the bourgeois candidate
whether they will or no.  If he desires a majority in a public meeting,
he dismisses them half-an-hour earlier than usual, and secures them
places close to the platform, where he can watch them to his
satisfaction.

Two further arrangements contribute especially to force the operative
under the dominion of the manufacturer; the Truck system and the Cottage
system.  The truck system, the payment of the operatives in goods, was
formerly universal in England.  The manufacturer opens a shop, "for the
convenience of the operatives, and to protect them from the high prices
of the petty dealers."  Here goods of all sorts are sold to them on
credit; and to keep the operatives from going to the shops where they
could get their goods more cheaply--the "Tommy shops" usually charging
twenty-five to thirty per cent. more than others--wages are paid in
requisitions on the shop instead of money.  The general indignation
against this infamous system led to the passage of the Truck Act in 1831,
by which, for most employees, payment in truck orders was declared void
and illegal, and was made punishable by fine; but, like most other
English laws, this has been enforced only here and there.  In the towns
it is carried out comparatively efficiently; but in the country, the
truck system, disguised or undisguised, flourishes.  In the town of
Leicester, too, it is very common.  There lie before me nearly a dozen
convictions for this offence, dating from the period between November,
1843, and June, 1844, and reported, in part, in the _Manchester Guardian_
and, in part, in the _Northern Star_.  The system is, of course, less
openly carried on at present; wages are usually paid in cash, but the
employer still has means enough at command to force him to purchase his
wares in the truck shop and nowhere else.  Hence it is difficult to
combat the truck system, because it can now be carried on under cover of
the law, provided only that the operative receives his wages in money.
The _Northern Star_ of April 27th, 1843, publishes a letter from an
operative of Holmfirth, near Huddersfield, in Yorkshire, which refers to
a manufacturer of the name of Bowers, as follows (retranslated from the
German):

   "It is very strange to think that the accursed truck system should
   exist to such an extent as it does in Holmfirth, and nobody be found
   who has the pluck to make the manufacturer stop it.  There are here a
   great many honest hand-weavers suffering through this damned system;
   here is one sample from a good many out of the noble-hearted Free
   Trade Clique.  There is a manufacturer who has upon himself the curses
   of the whole district on account of his infamous conduct towards his
   poor weavers; if they have got a piece ready which comes to 34 or 36
   shillings, he gives them 20s. in money and the rest in cloth or goods,
   and 40 to 50 per cent. dearer than at the other shops, and often
   enough the goods are rotten into the bargain.  But, what says the
   _Free Trade Mercury_, the _Leeds Mercury_?  They are not bound to take
   them; they can please themselves.  Oh, yes, but they must take them or
   else starve.  If they ask for another 20s. in money, they must wait
   eight or fourteen days for a warp; but if they take the 20s. and the
   goods, then there is always a warp ready for them.  And that is Free
   Trade.  Lord Brougham said we ought to put by something in our young
   days, so that we need not go to the parish when we are old.  Well, are
   we to put by the rotten goods?  If this did not come from a lord, one
   would say his brains were as rotten as the goods that our work is paid
   in.  When the unstamped papers came out "illegally," there was a lot
   of them to report it to the police in Holmfirth, the Blythes, the
   Edwards, etc.; but where are they now?  But this is different.  Our
   truck manufacturer belongs to the pious Free Trade lot; he goes to
   church twice every Sunday, and repeats devotedly after the parson: 'We
   have left undone the things we ought to have done, and we have done
   the things we ought not to have done, and there is no good in us; but,
   good Lord, deliver us.'  Yes, deliver us till to-morrow, and we will
   pay our weavers again in rotten goods."

The Cottage system looks much more innocent and arose in a much more
harmless way, though it has the same enslaving influence upon the
employee.  In the neighbourhood of the mills in the country, there is
often a lack of dwelling accommodation for the operatives.  The
manufacturer is frequently obliged to build such dwellings and does so
gladly, as they yield great advantages, besides the interest upon the
capital invested.  If any owner of working-men's dwellings averages about
six per cent. on his invested capital, it is safe to calculate that the
manufacturer's cottages yield twice this rate; for so long as his factory
does not stand perfectly idle he is sure of occupants, and of occupants
who pay punctually.  He is therefore spared the two chief disadvantages
under which other house-owners labour; his cottages never stand empty,
and he runs no risk.  But the rent of the cottages is as high as though
these disadvantages were in full force, and by obtaining the same rent as
the ordinary house-owner, the manufacturer, at cost of the operatives,
makes a brilliant investment at twelve to fourteen per cent.  For it is
clearly unjust that he should make twice as much profit as other
competing house-owners, who at the same time are excluded from competing
with him.  But it implies a double wrong, when he draws his fixed profit
from the pockets of the non-possessing class, which must consider the
expenditure of every penny.  He is used to that, however, he whose whole
wealth is gained at the cost of his employees.  But this injustice
becomes an infamy when the manufacturer, as often happens, forces his
operatives, who must occupy his houses on pain of dismissal, to pay a
higher rent than the ordinary one, or even to pay rent for houses in
which they do not live!  The _Halifax Guardian_, quoted by the Liberal
_Sun_, asserts that hundreds of operatives in Ashton-under-Lyne, Oldham,
and Rochdale, etc., are forced by their employers to pay house-rent
whether they occupy the house or not. {184}  The cottage system is
universal in the country districts; it has created whole villages, and
the manufacturer usually has little or no competition against his houses,
so that he can fix his price regardless of any market rate, indeed at his
pleasure.  And what power does the cottage system give the employer over
his operatives in disagreements between master and men?  If the latter
strike, he need only give them notice to quit his premises, and the
notice need only be a week; after that time the operative is not only
without bread but without a shelter, a vagabond at the mercy of the law
which sends him, without fail, to the treadmill.

Such is the factory system sketched as fully as my space permits, and
with as little partisan spirit as the heroic deeds of the bourgeoisie
against the defenceless workers permit--deeds to wards which it is
impossible to remain indifferent, towards which indifference were a
crime.  Let us compare the condition of the free Englishman of 1845 with
the Saxon serf under the lash of the Norman barons of 1145.  The serf was
_glebae adscriptus_, bound to the soil, so is the free working-man
through the cottage system.  The serf owed his master the _jus primae
noctis_, the right of the first night--the free working-man must, on
demand, surrender to his master not only that, but the right of every
night.  The serf could acquire no property; everything that he gained,
his master could take from him; the free working-man has no property, can
gain none by reason of the pressure of competition, and what even the
Norman baron did not do, the modern manufacturer does.  Through the truck
system, he assumes every day the administration in detail of the things
which the worker requires for his immediate necessities.  The relation of
the lord of the soil to the serf was regulated by the prevailing customs
and by-laws which were obeyed, because they corresponded to them.  The
free working-man's relation to his master is regulated by laws which are
_not_ obeyed, because they correspond neither with the interests of the
employer nor with the prevailing customs.  The lord of the soil could not
separate the serf from the land, nor sell him apart from it, and since
almost all the land was fief and there was no capital, practically could
not sell him at all.  The modern bourgeois forces the working-man to sell
himself.  The serf was the slave of the piece of land on which he was
born, the working-man is the slave of his own necessaries of life and of
the money with which he has to buy them--both are _slaves of a thing_.
The serf had a guarantee for the means of subsistence in the feudal order
of society in which every member had his own place.  The free working-man
has no guarantee whatsoever, because he has a place in society only when
the bourgeoisie can make use of him; in all other cases he is ignored,
treated as non-existent.  The serf sacrificed himself for his master in
war, the factory operative in peace.  The lord of the serf was a
barbarian who regarded his villain as a head of cattle; the employer of
operatives is civilised and regards his "hand" as a machine.  In short,
the position of the two is not far from equal, and if either is at a
disadvantage, it is the free working-man.  Slaves they both are, with the
single difference that the slavery of the one is undissembled, open,
honest; that of the other cunning, sly, disguised, deceitfully concealed
from himself and every one else, a hypocritical servitude worse than the
old.  The philanthropic Tories were right when they gave the operatives
the name white slaves.  But the hypocritical disguised slavery recognises
the right to freedom, at least in outward form; bows before a freedom-
loving public opinion, and herein lies the historic progress as compared
with the old servitude, that the _principle_ of freedom is affirmed, and
the oppressed will one day see to it that this principle is carried out.
{186}




THE REMAINING BRANCHES OF INDUSTRY.


We were compelled to deal with the factory system somewhat at length, as
it is an entirely novel creation of the industrial period; we shall be
able to treat the other workers the more briefly, because what has been
said either of the industrial proletariat in general, or of the factory
system in particular, will wholly, or in part, apply to them.  We shall,
therefore, merely have to record how far the factory system has succeeded
in forcing its way into each branch of industry, and what other
peculiarities these may reveal.

The four branches comprised under the Factory Act are engaged in the
production of clothing stuffs.  We shall do best if we deal next with
those workers who receive their materials from these factories; and,
first of all, with the stocking weavers of Nottingham, Derby, and
Leicester.  Touching these workers, the Children's Employment Commission
reports that the long working-hours, imposed by low wages, with a
sedentary life and the strain upon the eyes involved in the nature of the
employment, usually enfeeble the whole frame, and especially the eyes.
Work at night is impossible without a very powerful light produced by
concentrating the rays of the lamp, making them pass through glass
globes, which is most injurious to the sight.  At forty years of age,
nearly all wear spectacles.  The children employed at spooling and
hemming usually suffer grave injuries to the health and constitution.
They work from the sixth, seventh, or eighth year ten to twelve hours
daily in small, close rooms.  It is not uncommon for them to faint at
their work, to become too feeble for the most ordinary household
occupation, and so near-sighted as to be obliged to wear glasses during
childhood.  Many were found by the commissioners to exhibit all the
symptoms of a scrofulous constitution, and the manufacturers usually
refuse to employ girls who have worked in this way as being too weak.  The
condition of these children is characterised as "a disgrace to a
Christian country," and the wish expressed for legislative interference.
The Factory Report {189} adds that the stocking weavers are the worst
paid workers in Leicester, earning six, or with great effort, seven
shillings a week, for sixteen to eighteen hours' daily work.  Formerly
they earned twenty to twenty-one shillings, but the introduction of
enlarged frames has ruined their business; the great majority still work
with old, small, single frames, and compete with difficulty with the
progress of machinery.  Here, too, every progress is a disadvantage for
the workers.  Nevertheless, Commissioner Power speaks of the pride of the
stocking weavers that they are free, and had no factory bell to measure
out the time for their eating, sleeping, and working.  Their position to-
day is no better than in 1833, when the Factory Commission made the
foregoing statements, the competition of the Saxon stocking weavers, who
have scarcely anything to eat, takes care of that.  This competition is
too strong for the English in nearly all foreign markets, and for the
lower qualities of goods even in the English market.  It must be a source
of rejoicing for the patriotic German stocking weaver that his starvation
wages force his English brother to starve too!  And, verily, will he not
starve on, proud and happy, for the greater glory of German industry,
since the honour of the Fatherland demands that his table should be bare,
his dish half empty?  Ah! it is a noble thing this competition, this
"race of the nations."  In the _Morning Chronicle_, another Liberal
sheet, the organ of the bourgeoisie par excellence, there were published
some letters from a stocking weaver in Hinckley, describing the condition
of his fellow-workers.  Among other things, he reports 50 families, 321
persons, who were supported by 109 frames; each frame yielded on an
average 5.5 shillings; each family earned an average of 11s. 4d. weekly.
Out of this there was required for house rent, frame rent, fuel, light,
soap, and needles, together 5s. 10d., so that there remained for food,
per head daily, 1.5d., and for clothing nothing.  "No eye," says the
stocking weaver, "has seen, no ear heard, and no heart felt the half of
the sufferings that these poor people endure."  Beds were wanting either
wholly or in part, the children ran about ragged and barefoot; the men
said, with tears in their eyes: "It's a long time since we had any meat;
we have almost forgotten how it tastes;" and, finally, some of them
worked on Sunday, though public opinion pardons anything else more
readily than this, and the rattling noise of the frame is audible
throughout the neighbourhood.  "But," said one of them, "look at my
children and ask no questions.  My poverty forces me to it; I can't and
won't hear my children forever crying for bread, without trying the last
means of winning it honestly.  Last Monday I got up at two in the morning
and worked to near midnight; the other days from six in the morning to
between eleven and twelve at night.  I have had enough of it; I sha'n't
kill myself; so now I go to bed at ten o'clock, and make up the lost time
on Sundays."  Neither in Leicester, Nottingham, nor Derby have wages
risen since 1833; and the worst of it is that in Leicester the truck
system prevails to a great extent, as I have mentioned.  It is therefore
not to be wondered at that the weavers of this region take a very active
part in all working-men's movements, the more active and effective
because the frames are worked chiefly by men.

In this stocking weavers' district the lace industry also has its
headquarters.  In the three counties mentioned there are in all 2,760
lace frames in use, while in all the rest of England there are but 786.
The manufacture of lace is greatly complicated by a rigid division of
labour, and embraces a multitude of branches.  The yarn is first spooled
by girls fourteen years of age and upwards, winders; then the spools are
set up on the frames by boys, eight years old and upwards, threaders, who
pass the thread through fine openings, of which each machine has an
average of 1,800, and bring it towards its destination; then the weaver
weaves the lace which comes out of the machine like a broad piece of
cloth and is taken apart by very little children who draw out the
connecting threads.  This is called running or drawing lace, and the
children themselves lace-runners.  The lace is then made ready for sale.
The winders, like the threaders, have no specified working-time, being
called upon whenever the spools on a frame are empty, and are liable,
since the weavers work at night, to be required at any time in the
factory or workroom.  This irregularity, the frequent night-work, the
disorderly way of living consequent upon it, engender a multitude of
physical and moral ills, especially early and unbridled sexual licence,
upon which point all witnesses are unanimous.  The work is very bad for
the eyes, and although a permanent injury in the case of the threaders is
not universally observable, inflammations of the eye, pain, tears, and
momentary uncertainty of vision during the act of threading are
engendered.  For the winders, however, it is certain that their work
seriously affects the eye, and produces, besides the frequent
inflammations of the cornea, many cases of amaurosis and cataract.  The
work of the weavers themselves is very difficult, as the frames have
constantly been made wider, until those now in use are almost all worked
by three men in turn, each working eight hours, and the frame being kept
in use the whole twenty-four.  Hence it is that the winders and threaders
are so often called upon during the night, and must work to prevent the
frame from standing idle.  The filling in of 1,800 openings with thread
occupies three children at least two hours.  Many frames are moved by
steam-power, and the work of men thus superseded; and, as the Children's
Employment Commission's Report mentions only lace factories to which the
children are summoned, it seems to follow either that the work of the
weavers has been removed to great factory rooms of late, or that steam-
weaving has become pretty general; a forward movement of the factory
system in either case.  Most unwholesome of all is the work of the
runners, who are usually children of seven, and even of five and four,
years old.  Commissioner Grainger actually found one child of two years
old employed at this work.  Following a thread which is to be withdrawn
by a needle from an intricate texture, is very bad for the eyes,
especially when, as is usually the case, the work is continued fourteen
to sixteen hours.  In the least unfavourable case, aggravated
near-sightedness follows; in the worst case, which is frequent enough,
incurable blindness from amaurosis.  But, apart from that, the children,
in consequence of sitting perpetually bent up, become feeble,
narrow-chested, and scrofulous from bad digestion.  Disordered functions
of the uterus are almost universal among the girls, and curvature of the
spine also, so that "all the runners may be recognised from their gait."
The same consequences for the eyes and the whole constitution are
produced by the embroidery of lace.  Medical witnesses are unanimously of
the opinion that the health of all children employed in the production of
lace suffers seriously, that they are pale, weak, delicate, undersized,
and much less able than other children to resist disease.  The affections
from which they usually suffer are general debility, frequent fainting,
pains in the head, sides, back, and hips, palpitation of the heart,
nausea, vomiting and want of appetite, curvature of the spine, scrofula,
and consumption.  The health of the female lacemakers especially, is
constantly and deeply undermined; complaints are universal of anaemia,
difficult childbirth, and miscarriage. {192a}  The same subordinate
official of the Children's Employment Commission reports further that the
children are very often ill-clothed and ragged, and receive insufficient
food, usually only bread and tea, often no meat for months together.  As
to their moral condition, he reports: {192b}

   "All the inhabitants of Nottingham, the police, the clergy, the
   manufacturers, the working-people, and the parents of the children are
   all unanimously of opinion that the present system of labour is a most
   fruitful source of immorality.  The threaders, chiefly boys, and the
   winders, usually girls, are called for in the factory at the same
   time; and as their parents cannot know how long they are wanted there,
   they have the finest opportunity to form improper connections and
   remain together after the close of the work.  This has contributed, in
   no small degree, to the immorality which, according to general
   opinion, exists to a terrible extent in Nottingham.  Apart from this,
   the quiet of home life, and the comfort of the family to which these
   children and young people belong, is wholly sacrificed to this most
   unnatural state of things."

Another branch of lace-making, bobbin-lacework, is carried on in the
agricultural shires of Northampton, Oxford, and Bedford, chiefly by
children and young persons, who complain universally of bad food, and
rarely taste meat.  The employment itself is most unwholesome.  The
children work in small, ill-ventilated, damp rooms, sitting always bent
over the lace cushion.  To support the body in this wearying position,
the girls wear stays with a wooden busk, which, at the tender age of most
of them, when the bones are still very soft, wholly displace the ribs,
and make narrow chests universal.  They usually die of consumption after
suffering the severest forms of digestive disorders, brought on by
sedentary work in a bad atmosphere.  They are almost wholly without
education, least of all do they receive moral training.  They love
finery, and in consequence of these two influences their moral condition
is most deplorable, and prostitution almost epidemic among them. {193}

This is the price at which society purchases for the fine ladies of the
bourgeoisie the pleasure of wearing lace; a reasonable price truly!  Only
a few thousand blind working-men, some consumptive labourers' daughters,
a sickly generation of the vile multitude bequeathing its debility to its
equally "vile" children and children's children.  But what does that come
to?  Nothing, nothing whatsoever!  Our English bourgeoisie will lay the
report of the Government Commission aside indifferently, and wives and
daughters will deck themselves with lace as before.  It is a beautiful
thing, the composure of an English bourgeois.

A great number of operatives are employed in the cotton-printing
establishments of Lancashire, Derbyshire, and the West of Scotland.  In
no branch of English industry has mechanical ingenuity produced such
brilliant results as here, but in no other has it so crushed the workers.
The application of engraved cylinders driven by steam-power, and the
discovery of a method of printing four to six colours at once with such
cylinders, has as completely superseded hand-work as did the application
of machinery to the spinning and weaving of cotton, and these new
arrangements in the printing-works have superseded the hand-workers much
more than was the case in the production of the fabrics.  One man, with
the assistance of one child, now does with a machine the work done
formerly by 200 block printers; a single machine yields 28 yards of
printed cloth per minute.  The calico printers are in a very bad way in
consequence; the shires of Lancaster, Derby, and Chester produced
(according to a petition of the printers to the House of Commons), in the
year 1842, 11,000,000 pieces of printed cotton goods: of these, 100,000
were printed by hand exclusively, 900,000 in part with machinery and in
part by hand, and 10,000,000 by machinery alone, with four to six
colours.  As the machinery is chiefly new and undergoes constant
improvement, the number of hand-printers is far too great for the
available quantity of work, and many of them are therefore starving; the
petition puts the number at one-quarter of the whole, while the rest are
employed but one or two, in the best case three days in the week, and are
ill-paid.  Leach {194} asserts of one print-work (Deeply Dale, near Bury,
in Lancashire), that the hand-printers did not earn on an average more
than five shillings, though he knows that the machine-printers were
pretty well paid.  The print-works are thus wholly affiliated with the
factory system, but without being subject to the legislative restrictions
placed upon it.  They produce an article subject to fashion, and have
therefore no regular work.  If they have small orders, they work half
time; if they make a hit with a pattern, and business is brisk, they work
twelve hours, perhaps all night.  In the neighbourhood of my home, near
Manchester, there was a print-work that was often lighted when I returned
late at night; and I have heard that the children were obliged at times
to work so long there, that they would try to catch a moment's rest and
sleep on the stone steps and in the corners of the lobby.  I have no
legal proof of the truth of the statement, or I should name the firm.  The
Report of the Children's Employment Commission is very cursory upon this
subject, stating merely that in England, at least, the children are
mostly pretty well clothed and fed (relatively, according to the wages of
the parents), that they receive no education whatsoever, and are morally
on a low plane.  It is only necessary to remember that these children are
subject to the factory system, and then, referring the reader to what has
already been said of that, we can pass on.

Of the remaining workers employed in the manufacture of clothing stuffs
little remains to be said; the bleachers' work is very unwholesome,
obliging them to breathe chlorine, a gas injurious to the lungs.  The
work of the dyers is in many cases very healthful, since it requires the
exertion of the whole body; how these workers are paid is little known,
and this is ground enough for the inference that they do not receive less
than the average wages, otherwise they would make complaint.  The fustian
cutters, who, in consequence of the large consumption of cotton velvet,
are comparatively numerous, being estimated at from 3,000 to 4,000, have
suffered very severely, indirectly, from the influence of the factory
system.  The goods formerly woven with hand-looms, were not perfectly
uniform, and required a practised hand in cutting the single rows of
threads.  Since power-looms have been used, the rows run regularly; each
thread of the weft is exactly parallel with the preceding one, and
cutting is no longer an art.  The workers thrown out of employment by the
introduction of machinery turn to fustian cutting, and force down wages
by their competition; the manufacturers discovered that they could employ
women and children, and the wages sank to the rate paid them, while
hundreds of men were thrown out of employment.  The manufacturers found
that they could get the work done in the factory itself more cheaply than
in the cutters' workroom, for which they indirectly paid the rent.  Since
this discovery, the low upper-storey cutters' rooms stand empty in many a
cottage, or are let for dwellings, while the cutter has lost his freedom
of choice of his working-hours, and is brought under the dominion of the
factory bell.  A cutter of perhaps forty-five years of age told me that
he could remember a time when he had received 8d. a yard for work, for
which he now received 1d.; true, he can cut the more regular texture more
quickly than the old, but he can by no means do twice as much in an hour
as formerly, so that his wages have sunk to less than a quarter of what
they were.  Leach {196} gives a list of wages paid in 1827 and in 1843
for various goods, from which it appears that articles paid in 1827 at
the rates of 4d., 2.25d., 2.75d., and 1d. per yard, were paid in 1843 at
the rate of 1.5d., 1d., .75d., and 0.375d. per yard, cutters' wages.  The
average weekly wage, according to Leach, was as follows: 1827, 1 pounds
6s. 6d.; 1 pounds 2s. 6d.; 1 pounds; 1 pounds 6s. 6d.; and for the same
goods in 1843, 10s. 6d.; 7s. 6d.; 6s. 8d.; 10s.; while there are hundreds
of workers who cannot find employment even at these last named rates.  Of
the hand-weavers of the cotton industry we have already spoken; the other
woven fabrics are almost exclusively produced on hand-looms.  Here most
of the workers have suffered as the weavers have done from the crowding
in of competitors displaced by machinery, and are, moreover, subject like
the factory operatives to a severe fine system for bad work.  Take, for
instance, the silk weavers.  Mr. Brocklehurst, one of the largest silk
manufacturers in all England, laid before a committee of members of
Parliament lists taken from his books, from which it appears that for
goods for which he paid wages in 1821 at the rate of 30s., 14s., 3.5s.,
.75s., 1.5s., 10s., he paid in 1839 but 9s., 7.25s., 2.25s., 0.333s.,
0.5s., 6.25s., while in this case no improvement in the machinery has
taken place.  But what Mr. Brocklehurst does may very well be taken as a
standard for all.  From the same lists it appears that the average weekly
wage of his weavers, after all deductions, was, in 1821, 16.5s., and, in
1831, but 6s.  Since that time wages have fallen still further.  Goods
which brought in 4d. weavers' wages in 1831, bring in but 2.5d. in 1843
(single sarsnets), and a great number of weavers in the country can get
work only when they undertake these goods at 1.5d.-2d.  Moreover, they
are subject to arbitrary deductions from their wages.  Every weaver who
receives materials is given a card, on which is usually to be read that
the work is to be returned at a specified hour of the day; that a weaver
who cannot work by reason of illness must make the fact known at the
office within three days, or sickness will not be regarded as an excuse;
that it will not be regarded as a sufficient excuse if the weaver claims
to have been obliged to wait for yarn; that for certain faults in the
work (if, for example, more weft-threads are found within a given space
than are prescribed), not less than half the wages will be deducted; and
that if the goods should not be ready at the time specified, one penny
will be deducted for every yard returned.  The deductions in accordance
with these cards are so considerable that, for instance, a man who comes
twice a week to Leigh, in Lancashire, to gather up woven goods, brings
his employer at least 15 pound fines every time.  He asserts this
himself, and he is regarded as one of the most lenient.  Such things were
formerly settled by arbitration; but as the workers were usually
dismissed if they insisted upon that, the custom has been almost wholly
abandoned, and the manufacturer acts arbitrarily as prosecutor, witness,
judge, law-giver, and executive in one person.  And if the workman goes
to a Justice of the Peace, the answer is: "When you accepted your card
you entered upon a contract, and you must abide by it."  The case is the
same as that of the factory operatives.  Besides, the employer obliges
the workman to sign a document in which he declares that he agrees to the
deductions made.  And if a workman rebels, all the manufacturers in the
town know at once that he is a man who, as Leach says, {197} "resists the
lawful order as established by weavers' cards, and, moreover, has the
impudence to doubt the wisdom of those who are, as he ought to know, his
superiors in society."

Naturally, the workers are perfectly free; the manufacturer does not
force them to take his materials and his cards, but he says to them what
Leach translates into plain English with the words: "If you don't like to
be frizzled in my frying-pan, you can take a walk into the fire."  The
silk weavers of London, and especially of Spitalfields, have lived in
periodic distress for a long time, and that they still have no cause to
be satisfied with their lot is proved by their taking a most active part
in English labour movements in general, and in London ones in particular.
The distress prevailing among them gave rise to the fever which broke out
in East London, and called forth the Commission for Investigating the
Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Class.  But the last report of the
London Fever Hospital shows that this disease is still raging.

After the textile fabrics, by far the most important products of English
industry are the metal-wares.  This trade has its headquarters at
Birmingham, where the finer metal goods of all sorts are produced, at
Sheffield for cutlery, and in Staffordshire, especially at Wolverhampton,
where the coarser articles, locks, nails, etc., are manufactured.  In
describing the position of the workers employed in these trades, let us
begin with Birmingham.  The disposition of the work has retained in
Birmingham, as in most places where metals are wrought, something of the
old handicraft character; the small employers are still to be found, who
work with their apprentices in the shop at home, or when they need steam-
power, in great factory buildings which are divided into little shops,
each rented to a small employer, and supplied with a shaft moved by the
engine, and furnishing motive power for the machinery.  Leon Faucher,
author of a series of articles in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_, which at
least betray study, and are better than what has hitherto been written
upon the subject by Englishmen or Germans, characterises this relation in
contrast with the manufacture of Lancashire as "Democratie industrielle,"
and observes that it produces no very favourable results for master or
men.  This observation is perfectly correct, for the many small employers
cannot well subsist on the profit divided amongst them, determined by
competition, a profit under other circumstances absorbed by a single
manufacturer.  The centralising tendency of capital holds them down.  For
one who grows rich ten are ruined, and a hundred placed at a greater
disadvantage than ever, by the pressure of the one upstart who can afford
to sell more cheaply than they.  And in the cases where they have to
compete from the beginning against great capitalists, it is self-evident
that they can only toil along with the greatest difficulty.  The
apprentices are, as we shall see, quite as badly off under the small
employers as under the manufacturers, with the single difference that
they, in turn, may become small employers, and so attain a certain
independence--that is to say, they are at best less directly exploited by
the bourgeoisie than under the factory system.  Thus these small
employers are neither genuine proletarians, since they live in part upon
the work of their apprentices, nor genuine bourgeois, since their
principal means of support is their own work.  This peculiar midway
position of the Birmingham iron-workers is to blame for their having so
rarely joined wholly and unreservedly in the English labour movements.
Birmingham is a politically radical, but not a Chartist, town.  There
are, however, numerous larger factories belonging to capitalists; and in
these the factory system reigns supreme.  The division of labour, which
is here carried out to the last detail (in the needle industry, for
example), and the use of steam-power, admit of the employment of a great
multitude of women and children, and we find here {199} precisely the
same features reappearing which the Factories' Report presented,--the
work of women up to the hour of confinement, incapacity as housekeepers,
neglect of home and children, indifference, actual dislike to family
life, and demoralisation; further, the crowding out of men from
employment, the constant improvement of machinery, early emancipation of
children, husbands supported by their wives and children, etc. etc.  The
children are described as half-starved and ragged, the half of them are
said not to know what it is to have enough to eat, many of them get
nothing to eat before the midday meal, or even live the whole day upon a
pennyworth of bread for a noonday meal--there were actually cases in
which children received no food from eight in the morning until seven at
night.  Their clothing is very often scarcely sufficient to cover their
nakedness, many are barefoot even in winter.  Hence they are all small
and weak for their age, and rarely develop with any degree of vigour.  And
when we reflect that with these insufficient means of reproducing the
physical forces, hard and protracted work in close rooms is required of
them, we cannot wonder that there are few adults in Birmingham fit for
military service.  "The working men," says a recruiting surgeon, "are
small, delicate, and of very slight physical power; many of them
deformed, too, in the chest or spinal column."  According to the
assertion of a recruiting sergeant, the people of Birmingham are smaller
than those anywhere else, being usually 5 feet 4 to 5 inches tall; out of
613 recruits, but 238 were found fit for service.  As to education, a
series of depositions and specimens taken from the metal districts have
already been given, {200a} to which the reader is referred.  It appears
further, from the Children's Employment Commission's Report, that in
Birmingham more than half the children between five and fifteen years
attend no school whatsoever, that those who do are constantly changing,
so that it is impossible to give them any training of an enduring kind,
and that they are all withdrawn from school very early and set to work.
The report makes it clear what sort of teachers are employed.  One
teacher, in answer to the question whether she gave moral instruction,
said, No, for threepence a week school fees that was too much to require,
but that she took a great deal of trouble to instil good principles into
the children.  (And she made a decided slip in her English in saying it.)
In the schools the commissioner found constant noise and disorder.  The
moral state of the children is in the highest degree deplorable.  Half of
all the criminals are children under fifteen, and in a single year ninety
ten-years'-old offenders, among them forty-four serious criminal cases,
were sentenced.  Unbridled sexual intercourse seems, according to the
opinion of the commissioner, almost universal, and that at a very early
age. {200b}

In the iron district of Staffordshire the state of things is still worse.
For the coarse wares made here neither much division of labour (with
certain exceptions) nor steam-power or machinery can be applied.  In
Wolverhampton, Willenhall, Bilston, Sedgeley, Wednesfield, Darlaston,
Dudley, Walsall, Wednesbury, etc., there are, therefore, fewer factories,
but chiefly single forges, where the small masters work alone, or with
one or more apprentices, who serve them until reaching the twenty-first
year.  The small employers are in about the same situation as those of
Birmingham; but the apprentices, as a rule, are much worse off.  They get
almost exclusively meat from diseased animals or such as have died a
natural death, or tainted meat, or fish to eat, with veal from calves
killed too young, and pork from swine smothered during transportation,
and such food is furnished not by small employers only, but by large
manufacturers, who employ from thirty to forty apprentices.  The custom
seems to be universal in Wolverhampton, and its natural consequence is
frequent bowel complaints and other diseases.  Moreover, the children
usually do not get enough to eat, and have rarely other clothing than
their working rags, for which reason, if for no other, they cannot go to
Sunday school The dwellings are bad and filthy, often so much so that
they give rise to disease; and in spite of the not materially unhealthy
work, the children are puny, weak, and, in many cases, severely crippled.
In Willenhall, for instance, there are countless persons who have, from
perpetually filing at the lathe, crooked backs and one leg crooked, "hind-
leg" as they call it, so that the two legs have the form of a K; while it
is said that more than one-third of the working-men there are ruptured.
Here, as well as in Wolverhampton, numberless cases were found of
retarded puberty among girls, (for girls, too, work at the forges,) as
well as among boys, extending even to the nineteenth year.  In Sedgeley
and its surrounding district, where nails form almost the sole product,
the nailers live and work in the most wretched stable-like huts, which
for filth can scarcely be equalled.  Girls and boys work from the tenth
or twelfth year, and are accounted fully skilled only when they make a
thousand nails a day.  For twelve hundred nails the pay is 5.75d.  Every
nail receives twelve blows, and since the hammer weighs 1.25 pounds, the
nailer must lift 18,000 pounds to earn this miserable pay.  With this
hard work and insufficient food, the children inevitably develop
ill-formed, undersized frames, and the commissioners depositions confirm
this.  As to the state of education in this district, data have already
been furnished in the foregoing chapters.  It is upon an incredibly low
plane; half the children do not even go to Sunday school, and the other
half go irregularly; very few, in comparison with the other districts,
can read, and in the matter of writing the case is much worse.  Naturally,
for between the seventh and tenth years, just when they are beginning to
get some good out of going to school, they are set to work, and the
Sunday school teachers, smiths or miners, frequently cannot read, and
write their names with difficulty.  The prevailing morals correspond with
these means of education.  In Willenhall, Commissioner Horne asserts, and
supplies ample proofs of his assertion, that there exists absolutely no
moral sense among the workers.  In general, he found that the children
neither recognised duties to their parents nor felt any affection for
them.  They were so little capable of thinking of what they said, so
stolid, so hopelessly stupid, that they often asserted that they were
well treated, were coming on famously, when they were forced to work
twelve to fourteen hours, were clad in rags, did not get enough to eat,
and were beaten so that they felt it several days afterwards.  They knew
nothing of a different kind of life than that in which they toil from
morning until they are allowed to stop at night, and did not even
understand the question never heard before, whether they were tired.
{202}

In Sheffield wages are better, and the external state of the workers
also.  On the other hand, certain branches of work are to be noticed
here, because of their extraordinarily injurious influence upon health.
Certain operations require the constant pressure of tools against the
chest, and engender consumption in many cases; others, file-cutting among
them, retard the general development of the body and produce digestive
disorders; bone-cutting for knife handles brings with it headache,
biliousness, and among girls, of whom many are employed, anaemia.  By far
the most unwholesome work is the grinding of knife-blades and forks,
which, especially when done with a dry stone, entails certain early
death.  The unwholesomeness of this work lies in part in the bent
posture, in which chest and stomach are cramped; but especially in the
quantity of sharp-edged metal dust particles freed in the cutting, which
fill the atmosphere, and are necessarily inhaled.  The dry grinders'
average life is hardly thirty-five years, the wet grinders' rarely
exceeds forty-five.  Dr. Knight, in Sheffield, says: {203}

   "I can convey some idea of the injuriousness of this occupation only
   by asserting that the hardest drinkers among the grinders are the
   longest lived among them, because they are longest and oftenest absent
   from their work.  There are, in all, some 2,500 grinders in Sheffield.
   About 150 (80 men and 70 boys) are fork grinders; these die between
   the twenty-eighth and thirty-second years of age.  The razor grinders,
   who grind wet as well as dry, die between forty and forty-five years,
   and the table cutlery grinders, who grind wet, die between the
   fortieth and fiftieth year."

The same physician gives the following description of the course of the
disease called grinders' asthma:

   "They usually begin their work with the fourteenth year, and, if they
   have good constitutions, rarely notice any symptoms before the
   twentieth year.  Then the symptoms of their peculiar disease appear.
   They suffer from shortness of breath at the slightest effort in going
   up hill or up stairs, they habitually raise the shoulders to relieve
   the permanent and increasing want of breath; they bend forward, and
   seem, in general, to feel most comfortable in the crouching position
   in which they work.  Their complexion becomes dirty yellow, their
   features express anxiety, they complain of pressure upon the chest.
   Their voices become rough and hoarse, they cough loudly, and the sound
   is as if air were driven through a wooden tube.  From time to time
   they expectorate considerable quantities of dust, either mixed with
   phlegm or in balls or cylindrical masses, with a thin coating of
   mucus.  Spitting blood, inability to lie down, night sweat,
   colliquative diarrhoea, unusual loss of flesh, and all the usual
   symptoms of consumption of the lungs finally carry them off, after
   they have lingered months, or even years, unfit to support themselves
   or those dependent upon them.  I must add that all attempts which have
   hitherto been made to prevent grinders' asthma, or to cure it, have
   wholly failed."

All this Knight wrote ten years ago; since then the number of grinders
and the violence of the disease have increased, though attempts have been
made to prevent it by covered grindstones and carrying off the dust by
artificial draught.  These methods have been at least partially
successful, but the grinders do not desire their adoption, and have even
destroyed the contrivance here and there, in the belief that more workers
may be attracted to the business and wages thus reduced; they are for a
short life and a merry one.  Dr. Knight has often told grinders who came
to him with the first symptoms of asthma that a return to grinding means
certain death, but with no avail.  He who is once a grinder falls into
despair, as though he had sold himself to the devil.  Education in
Sheffield is upon a very low plane; a clergyman, who had occupied himself
largely with the statistics of education, was of the opinion that of
16,500 children of the working-class who are in a position to attend
school, scarcely 6,500 can read.  This comes of the fact that the
children are taken from school in the seventh, and, at the very latest,
in the twelfth year, and that the teachers are good for nothing; one was
a convicted thief who found no other way of supporting himself after
being released from jail than teaching school!  Immorality among young
people seems to be more prevalent in Sheffield than anywhere else.  It is
hard to tell which town ought to have the prize, and in reading the
report one believes of each one that this certainly deserves it!  The
younger generation spend the whole of Sunday lying in the street tossing
coins or fighting dogs, go regularly to the gin palace, where they sit
with their sweethearts until late at night, when they take walks in
solitary couples.  In an ale-house which the commissioner visited, there
sat forty to fifty young people of both sexes, nearly all under seventeen
years of age, and each lad beside his lass.  Here and there cards were
played, at other places dancing was going on, and everywhere drinking.
Among the company were openly avowed professional prostitutes.  No
wonder, then, that, as all the witnesses testify, early, unbridled sexual
intercourse, youthful prostitution, beginning with persons of fourteen to
fifteen years, is extraordinarily frequent in Sheffield.  Crimes of a
savage and desperate sort are of common occurrence; one year before the
commissioner's visit, a band, consisting chiefly of young persons, was
arrested when about to set fire to the town, being fully equipped with
lances and inflammable substances.  We shall see later that the labour
movement in Sheffield has this same savage character. {205}

Besides these two main centres of the metal industry, there are needle
factories in Warrington, Lancashire, where great want, immorality, and
ignorance prevail among the workers, and especially among the children;
and a number of nail forges in the neighbourhood of Wigan, in Lancashire,
and in the east of Scotland.  The reports from these latter districts
tell almost precisely the same story as those of Staffordshire.  There is
one more branch of this industry carried on in the factory districts,
especially in Lancashire, the essential peculiarity of which is the
production of machinery by machinery, whereby the workers, crowded out
elsewhere, are deprived of their last refuge, the creation of the very
enemy which supersedes them.  Machinery for planing and boring, cutting
screws, wheels, nuts, etc., with power lathes, has thrown out of
employment a multitude of men who formerly found regular work at good
wages; and whoever wishes to do so may see crowds of them in Manchester.

North of the iron district of Staffordshire lies an industrial region to
which we shall now turn our attention, the Potteries, whose headquarters
are in the borough of Stoke, embracing Henley, Burslem, Lane End, Lane
Delph, Etruria, Coleridge, Langport, Tunstall, and Golden Hill,
containing together 60,000 inhabitants.  The Children's Employment
Commission reports upon this subject that in some branches of this
industry, in the production of stoneware, the children have light
employment in warm, airy rooms; in others, on the contrary, hard, wearing
labour is required, while they receive neither sufficient food nor good
clothing.  Many children complain: "Don't get enough to eat, get mostly
potatoes with salt, never meat, never bread, don't go to school, haven't
got no clothes."  "Haven't got nothin' to eat to-day for dinner, don't
never have dinner at home, get mostly potatoes and salt, sometimes
bread."  "These is all the clothes I have, no Sunday suit at home."  Among
the children whose work is especially injurious are the mould-runners,
who have to carry the moulded article with the form to the drying-room,
and afterwards bring back the empty form, when the article is properly
dried.  Thus they must go to and fro the whole day, carrying burdens
heavy in proportion to their age, while the high temperature in which
they have to do this increases very considerably the exhaustiveness of
the work.  These children, with scarcely a single exception, are lean,
pale, feeble, stunted; nearly all suffer from stomach troubles, nausea,
want of appetite, and many of them die of consumption.  Almost as
delicate are the boys called "jiggers," from the "jigger" wheel which
they turn.  But by far the most injurious is the work of those who dip
the finished article into a fluid containing great quantities of lead,
and often of arsenic, or have to take the freshly-dipped article up with
the hand.  The hands and clothing of these workers, adults and children,
are always wet with this fluid, the skin softens and falls off under the
constant contact with rough objects, so that the fingers often bleed, and
are constantly in a state most favourable for the absorption of this
dangerous substance.  The consequence is violent pain, and serious
disease of the stomach and intestines, obstinate constipation, colic,
sometimes consumption, and, most common of all, epilepsy among children.
Among men, partial paralysis of the hand muscles, colica pictorum, and
paralysis of whole limbs are ordinary phenomena.  One witness relates
that two children who worked with him died of convulsions at their work;
another who had helped with the dipping two years while a boy, relates
that he had violent pains in the bowels at first, then convulsions, in
consequence of which he was confined to his bed two months, since when
the attacks of convulsions have increased in frequency, are now daily,
accompanied often by ten to twenty epileptic fits, his right arm is
paralysed, and the physicians tell him that he can never regain the use
of his limbs.  In one factory were found in the dipping-house four men,
all epileptic and afflicted with severe colic, and eleven boys, several
of whom were already epileptic.  In short, this frightful disease follows
this occupation universally: and that, too, to the greater pecuniary
profit of the bourgeoisie!  In the rooms in which the stoneware is
scoured, the atmosphere is filled with pulverised flint, the breathing of
which is as injurious as that of the steel dust among the Sheffield
grinders.  The workers lose breath, cannot lie down, suffer from sore
throat and violent coughing, and come to have so feeble a voice that they
can scarcely be heard.  They, too, all die of consumption.  In the
Potteries district, the schools are said to be comparatively numerous,
and to offer the children opportunities for instruction; but as the
latter are so early set to work for twelve hours and often more per day,
they are not in a position to avail themselves of the schools, so that
three-fourths of the children examined by the commissioner could neither
read nor write, while the whole district is plunged in the deepest
ignorance.  Children who have attended Sunday school for years could not
tell one letter from another, and the moral and religious education, as
well as the intellectual, is on a very low plane. {207}

In the manufacture of glass, too, work occurs which seems little
injurious to men, but cannot be endured by children.  The hard labour,
the irregularity of the hours, the frequent night-work, and especially
the great heat of the working place (100 to 130 Fahrenheit), engender in
children general debility and disease, stunted growth, and especially
affections of the eye, bowel complaint, and rheumatic and bronchial
affections.  Many of the children are pale, have red eyes, often blind
for weeks at a time, suffer from violent nausea, vomiting, coughs, colds,
and rheumatism.  When the glass is withdrawn from the fire, the children
must often go into such heat that the boards on which they stand catch
fire under their feet.  The glassblowers usually die young of debility
and chest affections. {208}

As a whole, this report testifies to the gradual but sure introduction of
the factory system into all branches of industry, recognisable especially
by the employment of women and children.  I have not thought it necessary
to trace in every case the progress of machinery and the superseding of
men as workers.  Every one who is in any degree acquainted with the
nature of manufacture can fill this out for himself, while space fails me
to describe in detail an aspect of our present system of production, the
result of which I have already sketched in dealing with the factory
system.  In all directions machinery is being introduced, and the last
trace of the working-man's independence thus destroyed.  In all
directions the family is being dissolved by the labour of wife and
children, or inverted by the husband's being thrown out of employment and
made dependent upon them for bread; everywhere the inevitable machinery
bestows upon the great capitalist command of trade and of the workers
with it.  The centralisation of capital strides forward without
interruption, the division of society into great capitalists and
non-possessing workers is sharper every day, the industrial development
of the nation advances with giant strides towards the inevitable crisis.

I have already stated that in the handicrafts the power of capital, and
in some cases the division of labour too, has produced the same results,
crushed the small tradesmen, and put great capitalists and non-possessing
workers in their place.  As to these handicraftsmen there is little to be
said, since all that relates to them has already found its place where
the proletariat in general was under discussion.  There has been but
little change here in the nature of the work and its influence upon
health since the beginning of the industrial movement.  But the constant
contact with the factory operatives, the pressure of the great
capitalists, which is much more felt than that of the small employer to
whom the apprentice still stood in a more or less personal relation, the
influences of life in towns, and the fall of wages, have made nearly all
the handicraftsmen active participators in labour movements.  We shall
soon have more to say on this point, and turn meanwhile to one section of
workers in London who deserve our attention by reason of the
extraordinary barbarity with which they are exploited by the money-greed
of the bourgeoisie.  I mean the dressmakers and sewing-women.

It is a curious fact that the production of precisely those articles
which serve the personal adornment of the ladies of the bourgeoisie
involves the saddest consequences for the health of the workers.  We have
already seen this in the case of the lacemakers, and come now to the
dressmaking establishments of London for further proof.  They employ a
mass of young girls--there are said to be 15,000 of them in all--who
sleep and eat on the premises, come usually from the country, and are
therefore absolutely the slaves of their employers.  During the
fashionable season, which lasts some four months, working-hours, even in
the best establishments, are fifteen, and, in very pressing cases,
eighteen a day; but in most shops work goes on at these times without any
set regulation, so that the girls never have more than six, often not
more than three or four, sometimes, indeed, not more than two hours in
the twenty-four, for rest and sleep, working nineteen to twenty hours, if
not the whole night through, as frequently happens!  The only limit set
to their work is the absolute physical inability to hold the needle
another minute.  Cases have occurred in which these helpless creatures
did not undress during nine consecutive days and nights, and could only
rest a moment or two here and there upon a mattress, where food was
served them ready cut up in order to require the least possible time for
swallowing.  In short, these unfortunate girls are kept by means of the
moral whip of the modern slave-driver, the threat of discharge, to such
long and unbroken toil as no strong man, much less a delicate girl of
fourteen to twenty years, can endure.  In addition to this, the foul air
of the workroom and sleeping places, the bent posture, the often bad and
indigestible food, all these causes, combined with almost total exclusion
from fresh air, entail the saddest consequences for the health of the
girls.  Enervation, exhaustion, debility, loss of appetite, pains in the
shoulders, back, and hips, but especially headache, begin very soon; then
follow curvatures of the spine, high, deformed shoulders, leanness,
swelled, weeping, and smarting eyes, which soon become short-sighted;
coughs, narrow chests, and shortness of breath, and all manner of
disorders in the development of the female organism.  In many cases the
eyes suffer, so severely that incurable blindness follows; but if the
sight remains strong enough to make continued work possible, consumption
usually soon ends the sad life of these milliners and dressmakers.  Even
those who leave this work at an early age retain permanently injured
health, a broken constitution; and, when married, bring feeble and sickly
children into the world.  All the medical men interrogated by the
commissioner agreed that no method of life could be invented better
calculated to destroy health and induce early death.

With the same cruelty, though somewhat more indirectly, the rest of the
needle-women of London are exploited.  The girls employed in stay-making
have a hard, wearing occupation, trying to the eyes.  And what wages do
they get?  I do not know; but this I know, that the middle-man who has to
give security for the material delivered, and who distributes the work
among the needle-women, receives 1.5d. per piece.  From this he deducts
his own pay, at least .5d., so that 1d. at most reaches the pocket of the
girl.  The girls who sew neckties must bind themselves to work sixteen
hours a day, and receive 4.5s. a week. {210}  But the shirtmakers' lot is
the worst.  They receive for an ordinary shirt 1.5d., formerly 2d.-3d.;
but since the workhouse of St. Pancras, which is administered by a
Radical board of guardians, began to undertake work at 1.5d., the poor
women outside have been compelled to do the same.  For fine, fancy
shirts, which can be made in one day of eighteen hours, 6d. is paid.  The
weekly wage of these sewing-women according to this and according to
testimony from many sides, including both needle-women and employers, is
2s. 6d. to 3s. for most strained work continued far into the night.  And
what crowns this shameful barbarism is the fact that the women must give
a money deposit for a part of the materials entrusted to them, which they
naturally cannot do unless they pawn a part of them (as the employers
very well know), redeeming them at a loss; or if they cannot redeem the
materials, they must appear before a Justice of the Peace, as happened a
sewing-woman in November, 1843.  A poor girl who got into this strait and
did not know what to do next, drowned herself in a canal in 1844.  These
women usually live in little garret rooms in the utmost distress, where
as many crowd together as the space can possibly admit, and where, in
winter, the animal warmth of the workers is the only heat obtainable.
Here they sit bent over their work, sewing from four or five in the
morning until midnight, destroying their health in a year or two and
ending in an early grave, without being able to obtain the poorest
necessities of life meanwhile. {211}  And below them roll the brilliant
equipages of the upper bourgeoisie, and perhaps ten steps away some
pitiable dandy loses more money in one evening at faro than they can earn
in a year.

* * * * *

Such is the condition of the English manufacturing proletariat.  In all
directions, whithersoever we may turn, we find want and disease permanent
or temporary, and demoralisation arising from the condition of the
workers; in all directions slow but sure undermining, and final
destruction of the human being physically as well as mentally.  Is this a
state of things which can last?  It cannot and will not last.  The
workers, the great majority of the nation, will not endure it.  Let us
see what they say of it.




LABOUR MOVEMENTS.


It must be admitted, even if I had not proved it so often in detail, that
the English workers cannot feel happy in this condition; that theirs is
not a state in which a man or a whole class of men can think, feel, and
live as human beings.  The workers must therefore strive to escape from
this brutalizing condition, to secure for themselves a better, more human
position; and this they cannot do without attacking the interest of the
bourgeoisie which consists in exploiting them.  But the bourgeoisie
defends its interests with all the power placed at its disposal by wealth
and the might of the State.  In proportion as the working-man determines
to alter the present state of things, the bourgeois becomes his avowed
enemy.

Moreover, the working-man is made to feel at every moment that the
bourgeoisie treats him as a chattel, as its property, and for this
reason, if for no other, he must come forward as its enemy.  I have shown
in a hundred ways in the foregoing pages, and could have shown in a
hundred others, that, in our present society, he can save his manhood
only in hatred and rebellion against the bourgeoisie.  And he can protest
with most violent passion against the tyranny of the propertied class,
thanks to his education, or rather want of education, and to the
abundance of hot Irish blood that flows in the veins of the English
working-class.  The English working-man is no Englishman nowadays; no
calculating money-grabber like his wealthy neighbour.  He possesses more
fully developed feelings, his native northern coldness is overborne by
the unrestrained development of his passions and their control over him.
The cultivation of the understanding which so greatly strengthens the
selfish tendency of the English bourgeois, which has made selfishness his
predominant trait and concentrated all his emotional power upon the
single point of money-greed, is wanting in the working-man, whose
passions are therefore strong and mighty as those of the foreigner.
English nationality is annihilated in the working-man.

Since, as we have seen, no single field for the exercise of his manhood
is left him, save his opposition to the whole conditions of his life, it
is natural that exactly in this opposition he should be most manly,
noblest, most worthy of sympathy.  We shall see that all the energy, all
the activity of the working-men is directed to this point, and that even
their attempts to attain general education all stand in direct connection
with this.  True, we shall have single acts of violence and even of
brutality to report, but it must always be kept in mind that the social
war is avowedly raging in England; and that, whereas it is in the
interest of the bourgeoisie to conduct this war hypocritically, under the
disguise of peace and even of philanthropy, the only help for the working-
men consists in laying bare the true state of things and destroying this
hypocrisy; that the most violent attacks of the workers upon the
bourgeoisie and its servants are only the open, undisguised expression of
that which the bourgeoisie perpetrates secretly, treacherously against
the workers.

The revolt of the workers began soon after the first industrial
development, and has passed through several phases.  The investigation of
their importance in the history of the English people I must reserve for
separate treatment, limiting myself meanwhile to such bare facts as serve
to characterise the condition of the English proletariat.

The earliest, crudest, and least fruitful form of this rebellion was that
of crime.  The working-man lived in poverty and want, and saw that others
were better off than he.  It was not clear to his mind why he, who did
more for society than the rich idler, should be the one to suffer under
these conditions.  Want conquered his inherited respect for the
sacredness of property, and he stole.  We have seen how crime increased
with the extension of manufacture; how the yearly number of arrests bore
a constant relation to the number of bales of cotton annually consumed.

The workers soon realised that crime did not help matters.  The criminal
could protest against the existing order of society only singly, as one
individual; the whole might of society was brought to bear upon each
criminal, and crushed him with its immense superiority.  Besides, theft
was the most primitive form of protest, and for this reason, if for no
other, it never became the universal expression of the public opinion of
the working-men, however much they might approve of it in silence.  As a
class, they first manifested opposition to the bourgeoisie when they
resisted the introduction of machinery at the very beginning of the
industrial period.  The first inventors, Arkwright and others, were
persecuted in this way and their machines destroyed.  Later, there took
place a number of revolts against machinery, in which the occurrences
were almost precisely the same as those of the printers' disturbances in
Bohemia in 1844; factories were demolished and machinery destroyed.

This form of opposition also was isolated, restricted to certain
localities, and directed against one feature only of our present social
arrangements.  When the momentary end was attained, the whole weight of
social power fell upon the unprotected evil-doers and punished them to
its heart's content, while the machinery was introduced none the less.  A
new form of opposition had to be found.

At this point help came in the shape of a law enacted by the old,
unreformed, oligarchic-Tory parliament, a law which never could have
passed the House of Commons later, when the Reform Bill had legally
sanctioned the distinction between bourgeoisie and proletariat, and made
the bourgeoisie the ruling class.  This was enacted in 1824, and repealed
all laws by which coalitions between working-men for labour purposes had
hitherto been forbidden.  The working-men obtained a right previously
restricted to the aristocracy and bourgeoisie, the right of free
association.  Secret coalitions had, it is true, previously existed, but
could never achieve great results.  In Glasgow, as Symonds {214} relates,
a general strike of weavers had taken place in 1812, which was brought
about by a secret association.  It was repeated in 1822, and on this
occasion vitriol was thrown into the faces of the two working-men who
would not join the association, and were therefore regarded by the
members as traitors to their class.  Both the assaulted lost the use of
their eyes in consequence of the injury.  So, too, in 1818, the
association of Scottish miners was powerful enough to carry on a general
strike.  These associations required their members to take an oath of
fidelity and secrecy, had regular lists, treasurers, bookkeepers, and
local branches.  But the secrecy with which everything was conducted
crippled their growth.  When, on the other hand, the working-man received
in 1824 the right of free association, these combinations were very soon
spread over all England and attained great power.  In all branches of
industry Trades Unions were formed with the outspoken intention of
protecting the single working-man against the tyranny and neglect of the
bourgeoisie.  Their objects were to deal, _en masse_, as a power, with
the employers; to regulate the rate of wages according to the profit of
the latter, to raise it when opportunity offered, and to keep it uniform
in each trade throughout the country.  Hence they tried to settle with
the capitalists a scale of wages to be universally adhered to, and
ordered out on strike the employees of such individuals as refused to
accept the scale.  They aimed further to keep up the demand for labour by
limiting the number of apprentices, and so to keep wages high; to
counteract, as far as possible, the indirect wages reductions which the
manufacturers brought about by means of new tools and machinery; and
finally, to assist unemployed working-men financially.  This they do
either directly or by means of a card to legitimate the bearer as a
"society man," and with which the working-man wanders from place to
place, supported by his fellow-workers, and instructed as to the best
opportunity for finding employment.  This is tramping, and the wanderer a
tramp.  To attain these ends, a President and Secretary are engaged at a
salary (since it is to be expected that no manufacturer will employ such
persons), and a committee collects the weekly contributions and watches
over their expenditure for the purposes of the association.  When it
proved possible and advantageous, the various trades of single districts
united in a federation and held delegate conventions at set times.  The
attempt has been made in single cases to unite the workers of one branch
over all England in one great Union; and several times (in 1830 for the
first time) to form one universal trades association for the whole United
Kingdom, with a separate organisation for each trade.  These
associations, however, never held together long, and were seldom realised
even for the moment, since an exceptionally universal excitement is
necessary to make such a federation possible and effective.

The means usually employed by these Unions for attaining their ends are
the following: If one or more employers refuse to pay the wage specified
by the Union, a deputation is sent or a petition forwarded (the working-
men, you see, know how to recognise the absolute power of the lord of the
factory in his little State); if this proves unavailing, the Union
commands the employees to stop work, and all hands go home.  This strike
is either partial when one or several, or general when all employers in
the trade refuse to regulate wages according to the proposals of the
Union.  So far go the lawful means of the Union, assuming the strike to
take effect after the expiration of the legal notice, which is not always
the case.  But these lawful means are very weak when there are workers
outside the Union, or when members separate from it for the sake of the
momentary advantage offered by the bourgeoisie.  Especially in the case
of partial strikes can the manufacturer readily secure recruits from
these black sheep (who are known as knobsticks), and render fruitless the
efforts of the united workers.  Knobsticks are usually threatened,
insulted, beaten, or otherwise maltreated by the members of the Union;
intimidated, in short, in every way.  Prosecution follows, and as the law-
abiding bourgeoisie has the power in its own hands, the force of the
Union is broken almost every time by the first unlawful act, the first
judicial procedure against its members.

The history of these Unions is a long series of defeats of the working-
men, interrupted by a few isolated victories.  All these efforts
naturally cannot alter the economic law according to which wages are
determined by the relation between supply and demand in the labour
market.  Hence the Unions remain powerless against all _great_ forces
which influence this relation.  In a commercial crisis the Union itself
must reduce wages or dissolve wholly; and in a time of considerable
increase in the demand for labour, it cannot fix the rate of wages higher
than would be reached spontaneously by the competition of the capitalists
among themselves.  But in dealing with minor, single influences they are
powerful.  If the employer had no concentrated, collective opposition to
expect, he would in his own interest gradually reduce wages to a lower
and lower point; indeed, the battle of competition which he has to wage
against his fellow-manufacturers would force him to do so, and wages
would soon reach the minimum.  But this competition of the manufacturers
among themselves is, _under average conditions_, somewhat restricted by
the opposition of the working-men.

Every manufacturer knows that the consequence of a reduction not
justified by conditions to which his competitors also are subjected,
would be a strike, which would most certainly injure him, because his
capital would be idle as long as the strike lasted, and his machinery
would be rusting, whereas it is very doubtful whether he could, in such a
case, enforce his reduction.  Then he has the certainty that if he should
succeed, his competitors would follow him, reducing the price of the
goods so produced, and thus depriving him of the benefit of his policy.
Then, too, the Unions often bring about a more rapid increase of wages
after a crisis than would otherwise follow.  For the manufacturer's
interest is to delay raising wages until forced by competition, but now
the working-men demand an increased wage as soon as the market improves,
and they can carry their point by reason of the smaller supply of workers
at his command under such circumstances.  But, for resistance to more
considerable forces which influence the labour market, the Unions are
powerless.  In such cases hunger gradually drives the strikers to resume
work on any terms, and when once a few have begun; the force of the Union
is broken, because these few knobsticks, with the reserve supplies of
goods in the market, enable the bourgeoisie to overcome the worst effects
of the interruption of business.  The funds of the Union are soon
exhausted by the great numbers requiring relief, the credit which the
shopkeepers give at high interest is withdrawn after a time, and want
compels the working-man to place himself once more under the yoke of the
bourgeoisie.  But strikes end disastrously for the workers mostly,
because the manufacturers, in their own interest (which has, be it said,
become their interest only through the resistance of the workers), are
obliged to avoid all useless reductions, while the workers feel in every
reduction imposed by the state of trade a deterioration of their
condition, against which they must defend themselves as far as in them
lies.

It will be asked, "Why, then, do the workers strike in such cases, when
the uselessness of such measures is so evident?"  Simply because they
_must_ protest against every reduction, even if dictated by necessity;
because they feel bound to proclaim that they, as human beings, shall not
be made to bow to social circumstances, but social conditions ought to
yield to them as human beings; because silence on their part would be a
recognition of these social conditions, an admission of the right of the
bourgeoisie to exploit the workers in good times and let them starve in
bad ones.  Against this the working-men must rebel so long as they have
not lost all human feeling, and that they protest in this way and no
other, comes of their being practical English people, who express
themselves in _action_, and do not, like German theorists, go to sleep as
soon as their protest is properly registered and placed _ad acta_, there
to sleep as quietly as the protesters themselves.  The active resistance
of the English working-men has its effect in holding the money greed of
the bourgeoisie within certain limits, and keeping alive the opposition
of the workers to the social and political omnipotence of the
bourgeoisie, while it compels the admission that something more is needed
than Trades Unions and strikes to break the power of the ruling class.
But what gives these Unions and the strikes arising from them their real
importance is this, that they are the first attempt of the workers to
abolish competition.  They imply the recognition of the fact that the
supremacy of the bourgeoisie is based wholly upon the competition of the
workers among themselves; _i.e_., upon their want of cohesion.  And
precisely because the Unions direct themselves against the vital nerve of
the present social order, however one-sidedly, in however narrow a way,
are they so dangerous to this social order.  The working-men cannot
attack the bourgeoisie, and with it the whole existing order of society,
at any sorer point than this.  If the competition of the workers among
themselves is destroyed, if all determine not to be further exploited by
the bourgeoisie, the rule of property is at an end.  Wages depend upon
the relation of demand to supply, upon the accidental state of the labour
market, simply because the workers have hitherto been content to be
treated as chattels, to be bought and sold.  The moment the workers
resolve to be bought and sold no longer, when in the determination of the
value of labour, they take the part of men possessed of a will as well as
of working-power, at that moment the whole Political Economy of to-day is
at an end.

The laws determining the rate of wages would, indeed, come into force
again in the long run, if the working-men did not go beyond this step of
abolishing competition among themselves.  But they must go beyond that
unless they are prepared to recede again and to allow competition among
themselves to reappear.  Thus once advanced so far, necessity compels
them to go farther; to abolish not only one kind of competition, but
competition itself altogether, and that they will do.

The workers are coming to perceive more clearly with every day how
competition affects them; they see far more clearly than the bourgeois
that competition of the capitalists among themselves presses upon the
workers too, by bringing on commercial crises, and that this kind of
competition; too, must be abolished.  They will soon learn _how_ they
have to go about it.

That these Unions contribute greatly to nourish the bitter hatred of the
workers against the property-holding class need hardly be said.  From
them proceed, therefore, with or without the connivance of the leading
members, in times of unusual excitement, individual actions which can be
explained only by hatred wrought to the pitch of despair, by a wild
passion overwhelming all restraints.  Of this sort are the attacks with
vitriol mentioned in the foregoing pages, and a series of others, of
which I shall cite several.  In 1831, during a violent labour movement,
young Ashton, a manufacturer in Hyde, near Manchester, was shot one
evening when crossing a field, and no trace of the assassin discovered.
There is no doubt that this was a deed of vengeance of the working-men.
Incendiarisms and attempted explosions are very common.  On Friday,
September 29th, 1843, an attempt was made to blow up the saw-works of
Padgin, in Howard Street, Sheffield.  A closed iron tube filled with
powder was the means employed, and the damage was considerable.  On the
following day, a similar attempt was made in Ibbetson's knife and file
works at Shales Moor, near Sheffield.  Mr. Ibbetson had made himself
obnoxious by an active participation in bourgeois movements, by low
wages, the exclusive employment of knobsticks, and the exploitation of
the Poor Law for his own benefit.  He had reported, during the crisis of
1842, such operatives as refused to accept reduced wages, as persons who
could find work but would not take it, and were, therefore, not deserving
of relief, so compelling the acceptance of a reduction.  Considerable
damage was inflicted by the explosion, and all the working-men who came
to view it regretted only "that the whole concern was not blown into the
air."  On Friday, October 6th, 1844, an attempt to set fire to the
factory of Ainsworth and Crompton, at Bolton, did no damage; it was the
third or fourth attempt in the same factory within a very short time.  In
the meeting of the Town Council of Sheffield, on Wednesday, January 10th,
1844, the Commissioner of Police exhibited a cast-iron machine, made for
the express purpose of producing an explosion, and found filled with four
pounds of powder, and a fuse which had been lighted but had not taken
effect, in the works of Mr. Kitchen, Earl Street, Sheffield.  On Sunday,
January 20th, 1844, an explosion caused by a package of powder took place
in the sawmill of Bently & White, at Bury, in Lancashire, and produced
considerable damage.  On Thursday, February 1st, 1844, the Soho Wheel
Works, in Sheffield, were set on fire and burnt up.

Here are six such cases in four months, all of which have their sole
origin in the embitterment of the working-men against the employers.  What
sort of a social state it must be in which such things are possible I
need hardly say.  These facts are proof enough that in England, even in
good business years, such as 1843, the social war is avowed and openly
carried on, and still the English bourgeoisie does not stop to reflect!
But the case which speaks most loudly is that of the Glasgow Thugs,
{221a} which came up before the Assizes from the 3rd to the 11th of
January, 1838.  It appears from the proceedings that the Cotton-Spinners'
Union, which existed here from the year 1816, possessed rare organisation
and power.  The members were bound by an oath to adhere to the decision
of the majority, and had during every turnout a secret committee which
was unknown to the mass of the members, and controlled the funds of the
Union absolutely.  This committee fixed a price upon the heads of
knobsticks and obnoxious manufacturers and upon incendiarisms in mills.  A
mill was thus set on fire in which female knobsticks were employed in
spinning in the place of men; a Mrs. M'Pherson, mother of one of these
girls, was murdered, and both murderers sent to America at the expense of
the association.  As early as 1820, a knobstick named M'Quarry was shot
at and wounded, for which deed the doer received twenty pounds from the
Union, but was discovered and transported for life.  Finally, in 1837, in
May, disturbances occurred in consequence of a turnout in the Oatbank and
Mile End factories, in which perhaps a dozen knobsticks were maltreated.
In July, of the same year, the disturbances still continued, and a
certain Smith, a knobstick, was so maltreated that he died.  The
committee was now arrested, an investigation begun, and the leading
members found guilty of participation in conspiracies, maltreatment of
knobsticks, and incendiarism in the mill of James and Francis Wood, and
they were transported for seven years.  What do our good Germans say to
this story? {221b}

The property-holding class, and especially the manufacturing portion of
it which comes into direct contact with the working-men, declaims with
the greatest violence against these Unions, and is constantly trying to
prove their uselessness to the working-men upon grounds which are
economically perfectly correct, but for that very reason partially
mistaken, and for the working-man's understanding totally without effect.
The very zeal of the bourgeoisie shows that it is not disinterested in
the matter; and apart from the indirect loss involved in a turnout, the
state of the case is such that whatever goes into the pockets of the
manufacturers comes of necessity out of those of the worker.  So that
even if the working-men did not know that the Unions hold the emulation
of their masters in the reduction of wages, at least in a measure, in
check, they would still stand by the Unions, simply to the injury of
their enemies, the manufacturers.  In war the injury of one party is the
benefit of the other, and since the working-men are on a war-footing
towards their employers, they do merely what the great potentates do when
they get into a quarrel.  Beyond all other bourgeois is our friend Dr.
Ure, the most furious enemy of the Unions.  He foams with indignation at
the "secret tribunals" of the cotton-spinners, the most powerful section
of the workers, tribunals which boast their ability to paralyse every
disobedient manufacturer, {222a} "and so bring ruin on the man who had
given them profitable employment for many a year."  He speaks of a time
{222b} "when the inventive head and the sustaining heart of trade were
held in bondage by the unruly lower members."  A pity that the English
working-men will not let themselves be pacified so easily with thy fable
as the Roman Plebs, thou modern Menenius Agrippa!  Finally, he relates
the following: At one time the coarse mule-spinners had misused their
power beyond all endurance.  High wages, instead of awakening
thankfulness towards the manufacturers and leading to intellectual
improvement (in harmless study of sciences useful to the bourgeoisie, of
course), in many cases produced pride and supplied funds for supporting
rebellious spirits in strikes, with which a number of manufacturers were
visited one after the other in a purely arbitrary manner.  During an
unhappy disturbance of this sort in Hyde, Dukinfield, and the surrounding
neighbourhood, the manufacturers of the district, anxious lest they
should be driven from the market by the French, Belgians, and Americans,
addressed themselves to the machine-works of Sharp, Roberts & Co., and
requested Mr. Sharp to turn his inventive mind to the construction of an
automatic mule in order "to emancipate the trade from galling slavery and
impending ruin." {223a}

"He produced in the course of a few months a machine apparently instinct
with the thought, feeling, and tact of the experienced workman--which
even in its infancy displayed a new principle of regulation, ready in its
mature state to fulfil the functions of a finished spinner.  Thus the
Iron Man, as the operatives fitly call it, sprung out of the hands of our
modern Prometheus at the bidding of Minerva--a creation destined to
restore order among the industrious classes, and to confirm to Great
Britain the empire of art.  The news of this Herculean prodigy spread
dismay through the Union, and even long before it left its cradle, so to
speak, it strangled the Hydra of misrule." {223b}

Ure proves further that the invention of the machine, with which four and
five colours are printed at once, was a result of the disturbances among
the calico printers; that the refractoriness of the yarn-dressers in the
power-loom weaving mills gave rise to a new and perfected machine for
warp-dressing, and mentions several other such cases.  A few pages
earlier this same Ure gives himself a great deal of trouble to prove in
detail that machinery is beneficial to the workers!  But Ure is not the
only one; in the Factory Report, Mr. Ashworth, the manufacturer, and many
another, lose no opportunity to express their wrath against the Unions.
These wise bourgeois, like certain governments, trace every movement
which they do not understand, to the influence of ill-intentioned
agitators, demagogues, traitors, spouting idiots, and ill-balanced youth.
They declare that the paid agents of the Unions are interested in the
agitation because they live upon it, as though the necessity for this
payment were not forced upon them by the bourgeois, who will give such
men no employment!

The incredible frequency of these strikes proves best of all to what
extent the social war has broken out all over England.  No week passes,
scarcely a day, indeed, in which there is not a strike in some direction,
now against a reduction, then against a refusal to raise the rate of
wages, again by reason of the employment of knobsticks or the continuance
of abuses, sometimes against new machinery, or for a hundred other
reasons.  These strikes, at first skirmishes, sometimes result in weighty
struggles; they decide nothing, it is true, but they are the strongest
proof that the decisive battle between bourgeoisie and proletariat is
approaching.  They are the military school of the working-men in which
they prepare themselves for the great struggle which cannot be avoided;
they are the pronunciamentos of single branches of industry that these
too have joined the labour movement.  And when one examines a year's file
of the _Northern Star_, the only sheet which reports all the movements of
the proletariat, one finds that all the proletarians of the towns and of
country manufacture have united in associations, and have protested from
time to time, by means of a general strike, against the supremacy of the
bourgeoisie.  And as schools of war, the Unions are unexcelled.  In them
is developed the peculiar courage of the English.  It is said on the
Continent that the English, and especially the working-men, are cowardly,
that they cannot carry out a revolution because, unlike the French, they
do not riot at intervals, because they apparently accept the bourgeois
_regime_ so quietly.  This is a complete mistake.  The English working-
men are second to none in courage; they are quite as restless as the
French, but they fight differently.  The French, who are by nature
political, struggle against social evils with political weapons; the
English, for whom politics exist only as a matter of interest, solely in
the interest of bourgeois society, fight, not against the Government, but
directly against the bourgeoisie; and for the time, this can be done only
in a peaceful manner.  Stagnation in business, and the want consequent
upon it, engendered the revolt at Lyons, in 1834, in favour of the
Republic: in 1842, at Manchester, a similar cause gave rise to a
universal turnout for the Charter and higher wages.  That courage is
required for a turnout, often indeed much loftier courage, much bolder,
firmer determination than for an insurrection, is self-evident.  It is,
in truth, no trifle for a working-man who knows want from experience, to
face it with wife and children, to endure hunger and wretchedness for
months together, and stand firm and unshaken through it all.  What is
death, what the galleys which await the French revolutionist, in
comparison with gradual starvation, with the daily sight of a starving
family, with the certainty of future revenge on the part of the
bourgeoisie, all of which the English working-man chooses in preference
to subjection under the yoke of the property-holding class?  We shall
meet later an example of this obstinate, unconquerable courage of men who
surrender to force only when all resistance would be aimless and
unmeaning.  And precisely in this quiet perseverance, in this lasting
determination which undergoes a hundred tests every day, the English
working-man develops that side of his character which commands most
respect.  People who endure so much to bend one single bourgeois will be
able to break the power of the whole bourgeoisie.

But apart from that, the English working-man has proved his courage often
enough.  That the turnout of 1842 had no further results came from the
fact that the men were in part forced into it by the bourgeoisie, in part
neither clear nor united as to its object.  But aside from this, they
have shown their courage often enough when the matter in question was a
specific social one.  Not to mention the Welsh insurrection of 1839, a
complete battle was waged in Manchester in May, 1843, during my residence
there.  Pauling & Henfrey, a brick firm, had increased the size of the
bricks without raising wages, and sold the bricks, of course, at a higher
price.  The workers, to whom higher wages were refused, struck work, and
the Brickmakers' Union declared war upon the firm.  The firm, meanwhile,
succeeded with great difficulty in securing hands from the neighbourhood,
and among the knobsticks, against whom in the beginning intimidation was
used, the proprietors set twelve men to guard the yard, all ex-soldiers
and policemen, armed with guns.  When intimidation proved unavailing, the
brick-yard, which lay scarcely a hundred paces from an infantry barracks,
was stormed at ten o'clock one night by a crowd of brickmakers, who
advanced in military order, the first ranks armed with guns.  They forced
their way in, fired upon the watchmen as soon as they saw them, stamped
out the wet bricks spread out to dry, tore down the piled-up rows of
those already dry, demolished everything which came in their way, pressed
into a building, where they destroyed the furniture and maltreated the
wife of the overlooker who was living there.  The watchmen, meanwhile,
had placed themselves behind a hedge, whence they could fire safely and
without interruption.  The assailants stood before a burning brick-kiln,
which threw a bright light upon them, so that every ball of their enemies
struck home, while every one of their own shots missed its mark.
Nevertheless, the firing lasted half-an-hour, until the ammunition was
exhausted, and the object of the visit--the demolition of all the
destructible objects in the yard--was attained.  Then the military
approached, and the brickmakers withdrew to Eccles, three miles from
Manchester.  A short time before reaching Eccles they held roll-call, and
each man was called according to his number in the section when they
separated, only to fall the more certainly into the hands of the police,
who were approaching from all sides.  The number of the wounded must have
been very considerable, but those only could be counted who were
arrested.  One of these had received three bullets (in the thigh, the
calf, and the shoulder), and had travelled in spite of them more than
four miles on foot.  These people have proved that they, too, possess
revolutionary courage, and do not shun a rain of bullets.  And when an
unarmed multitude, without a precise aim common to them all, are held in
check in a shut-off market-place, whose outlets are guarded by a couple
of policemen and dragoons, as happened in 1842, this by no means proves a
want of courage.  On the contrary, the multitude would have stirred quite
as little if the servants of public (_i.e_., of the bourgeois) order had
not been present.  Where the working-people have a specific end in view,
they show courage enough; as, for instance, in the attack upon Birley's
mill, which had later to be protected by artillery.

In this connection, a word or two as to the respect for the law in
England.  True, the law is sacred to the bourgeois, for it is his own
composition, enacted with his consent, and for his benefit and
protection.  He knows that, even if an individual law should injure him,
the whole fabric protects his interests; and more than all, the sanctity
of the law, the sacredness of order as established by the active will of
one part of society, and the passive acceptance of the other, is the
strongest support of his social position.  Because the English bourgeois
finds himself reproduced in his law, as he does in his God, the
policeman's truncheon which, in a certain measure, is his own club, has
for him a wonderfully soothing power.  But for the working-man quite
otherwise!  The working-man knows too well, has learned from too
oft-repeated experience, that the law is a rod which the bourgeois has
prepared for him; and when he is not compelled to do so, he never appeals
to the law.  It is ridiculous to assert that the English working-man
fears the police, when every week in Manchester policemen are beaten, and
last year an attempt was made to storm a station-house secured by iron
doors and shutters.  The power of the police in the turnout of 1842 lay,
as I have already said, in the want of a clearly defined object on the
part of the working-men themselves.

Since the working-men do not respect the law, but simply submit to its
power when they cannot change it, it is most natural that they should at
least propose alterations in it, that they should wish to put a
proletarian law in the place of the legal fabric of the bourgeoisie.  This
proposed law is the People's Charter, which in form is purely political,
and demands a democratic basis for the House of Commons.  Chartism is the
compact form of their opposition to the bourgeoisie.  In the Unions and
turnouts opposition always remained isolated: it was single working-men
or sections who fought a single bourgeois.  If the fight became general,
this was scarcely by the intention of the working-men; or, when it did
happen intentionally, Chartism was at the bottom of it.  But in Chartism
it is the whole working class which arises against the bourgeoisie, and
attacks, first of all, the political power, the legislative rampart with
which the bourgeoisie has surrounded itself.  Chartism has proceeded from
the Democratic party which arose between 1780 and 1790 with and in the
proletariat, gained strength during the French Revolution, and came forth
after the peace as the Radical party.  It had its headquarters then in
Birmingham and Manchester, and later in London; extorted the Reform Bill
from the Oligarchs of the old Parliament by a union with the Liberal
bourgeoisie, and has steadily consolidated itself, since then, as a more
and more pronounced working-men's party in opposition to the bourgeoisie
In 1835 a committee of the General Working-men's Association of London,
with William Lovett at its head, drew up the People's Charter, whose six
points are as follows: (1) Universal suffrage for every man who is of
age, sane and unconvicted of crime; (2) Annual Parliaments; (3) Payment
of members of Parliament, to enable poor men to stand for election; (4)
Voting by ballot to prevent bribery and intimidation by the bourgeoisie;
(5) Equal electoral districts to secure equal representation; and (6)
Abolition of the even now merely nominal property qualification of 300
pounds in land for candidates in order to make every voter eligible.
These six points, which are all limited to the reconstitution of the
House of Commons, harmless as they seem, are sufficient to overthrow the
whole English Constitution, Queen and Lords included.  The so-called
monarchical and aristocratic elements of the Constitution can maintain
themselves only because the bourgeoisie has an interest in the
continuance of their sham existence; and more than a sham existence
neither possesses to-day.  But as soon as real public opinion in its
totality backs the House of Commons, as soon as the House of Commons
incorporates the will, not of the bourgeoisie alone, but of the whole
nation, it will absorb the whole power so completely that the last halo
must fall from the head of the monarch and the aristocracy.  The English
working-man respects neither Lords nor Queen.  The bourgeois, while in
reality allowing them but little influence, yet offers to them personally
a sham worship.  The English Chartist is politically a republican, though
he rarely or never mentions the word, while he sympathises with the
republican parties of all countries, and calls himself in preference a
democrat.  But he is more than a mere republican, his democracy is not
simply political.

Chartism was from the beginning in 1835 chiefly a movement among the
working-men, though not yet sharply separated from the bourgeoisie.  The
Radicalism of the workers went hand in hand with the Radicalism of the
bourgeoisie; the Charter was the shibboleth of both.  They held their
National Convention every year in common, seeming to be one party.  The
lower middle-class was just then in a very bellicose and violent state of
mind in consequence of the disappointment over the Reform Bill and of the
bad business years of 1837-1839, and viewed the boisterous Chartist
agitation with a very favourable eye.  Of the vehemence of this agitation
no one in Germany has any idea.  The people were called upon to arm
themselves, were frequently urged to revolt; pikes were got ready, as in
the French Revolution, and in 1838, one Stephens, a Methodist parson,
said to the assembled working-people of Manchester:

   "You have no need to fear the power of Government, the soldiers,
   bayonets, and cannon that are at the disposal of your oppressors; you
   have a weapon that is far mightier than all these, a weapon against
   which bayonets and cannon are powerless, and a child of ten years can
   wield it.  You have only to take a couple of matches and a bundle of
   straw dipped in pitch, and I will see what the Government and its
   hundreds of thousands of soldiers will do against this one weapon if
   it is used boldly."

As early as that year the peculiarly social character of the
working-men's Chartism manifested itself.  The same Stephens said, in a
meeting of 200,000 men on Kersall Moor, the Mons Sacer of Manchester:

   "Chartism, my friends, is no political movement, where the main point
   is your getting the ballot.  Chartism is a knife and fork question:
   the Charter means a good house, good food and drink, prosperity, and
   short working-hours."

The movements against the new Poor Law and for the Ten Hours' Bill were
already in the closest relation to Chartism.  In all the meetings of that
time the Tory Oastler was active, and hundreds of petitions for
improvements of the social condition of the workers were circulated along
with the national petition for the People's Charter adopted in
Birmingham.  In 1839 the agitation continued as vigorously as ever, and
when it began to relax somewhat at the end of the year, Bussey, Taylor,
and Frost hastened to call forth uprisings simultaneously in the North of
England, in Yorkshire, and Wales.  Frost's plan being betrayed, he was
obliged to open hostilities prematurely.  Those in the North heard of the
failure of his attempt in time to withdraw.  Two months later, in
January, 1840, several so-called spy outbreaks took place in Sheffield
and Bradford, in Yorkshire, and the excitement gradually subsided.
Meanwhile the bourgeoisie turned its attention to more practical
projects, more profitable for itself, namely the Corn Laws.  The Anti-
Corn Law Association was formed in Manchester, and the consequence was a
relaxation of the tie between the Radical bourgeoisie and the
proletariat.  The working-men soon perceived that for them the abolition
of the Corn Laws could be of little use, while very advantageous to the
bourgeoisie; and they could therefore not be won for the project.

The crisis of 1842 came on.  Agitation was once more as vigorous as in
1839.  But this time the rich manufacturing bourgeoisie, which was
suffering severely under this particular crisis, took part in it.  The
Anti-Corn Law League, as it was now called, assumed a decidedly
revolutionary tone.  Its journals and agitators used undisguisedly
revolutionary language, one very good reason for which was the fact that
the Conservative party had been in power since 1841.  As the Chartists
had previously done, these bourgeois leaders called upon the people to
rebel; and the working-men who had most to suffer from the crisis were
not inactive, as the year's national petition for the charter with its
three and a half million signatures proves.  In short, if the two Radical
parties had been somewhat estranged, they allied themselves once more.  At
a meeting of Liberals and Chartists held in Manchester, February 15th,
1842, a petition urging the repeal of the Corn Laws and the adoption of
the Charter was drawn up.  The next day it was adopted by both parties.
The spring and summer passed amidst violent agitation and increasing
distress.  The bourgeoisie was determined to carry the repeal of the Corn
Laws with the help of the crisis, the want which it entailed, and the
general excitement.  At this time, the Conservatives being in power, the
Liberal bourgeoisie half abandoned their law-abiding habits; they wished
to bring about a revolution with the help of the workers.  The working-
men were to take the chestnuts from the fire to save the bourgeoisie from
burning their own fingers.  The old idea of a "holy month," a general
strike, broached in 1839 by the Chartists, was revived.  This time,
however, it was not the working-men who wished to quit work, but the
manufacturers who wished to close their mills and send the operatives
into the country parishes upon the property of the aristocracy, thus
forcing the Tory Parliament and the Tory Ministry to repeal the Corn
Laws.  A revolt would naturally have followed, but the bourgeoisie stood
safely in the background and could await the result without compromising
itself if the worst came to the worst.  At the end of July business began
to improve; it was high time.  In order not to lose the opportunity,
three firms in Staleybridge reduced wages in spite of the improvement.
{232}  Whether they did so of their own motion or in agreement with other
manufacturers, especially those of the League, I do not know.  Two
withdrew after a time, but the third, William Bailey & Brothers, stood
firm, and told the objecting operatives that "if this did not please
them, they had better go and play a bit."  This contemptuous answer the
hands received with cheers.  They left the mill, paraded through the
town, and called upon all their fellows to quit work.  In a few hours
every mill stood idle, and the operatives marched to Mottram Moor to hold
a meeting.  This was on August 5th.  August 8th they proceeded to Ashton
and Hyde five thousand strong, closed all the mills and coal-pits, and
held meetings, in which, however, the question discussed was not, as the
bourgeoisie had hoped, the repeal of the Corn Laws, but, "a fair day's
wages for a fair day's work."  August 9th they proceeded to Manchester,
unresisted by the authorities (all Liberals), and closed the mills; on
the 11th they were in Stockport, where they met with the first resistance
as they were storming the workhouse, the favourite child of the
bourgeoisie.  On the same day there was a general strike and disturbance
in Bolton, to which the authorities here, too, made no resistance.  Soon
the uprising spread throughout the whole manufacturing district, and all
employments, except harvesting and the production of food, came to a
standstill.  But the rebellious operatives were quiet.  They were driven
into this revolt without wishing it.  The manufacturers, with the single
exception of the Tory Birley, in Manchester, had, _contrary to their
custom_, not opposed it.  The thing had begun without the working-men's
having any distinct end in view, for which reason they were all united in
the determination not to be shot at for the benefit of the Corn Law
repealing bourgeoisie.  For the rest, some wanted to carry the Charter,
others who thought this premature wished merely to secure the wages rate
of 1840.  On this point the whole insurrection was wrecked.  If it had
been from the beginning an intentional, determined working-men's
insurrection, it would surely have carried its point; but these crowds
who had been driven into the streets by their masters, against their own
will, and with no definite purpose, could do nothing.  Meanwhile the
bourgeoisie, which had not moved a finger to carry the alliance of
February 10th into effect, soon perceived that the working-men did not
propose to become its tools, and that the illogical manner in which it
had abandoned its law-abiding standpoint threatened danger.  It therefore
resumed its law-abiding attitude, and placed itself upon the side of
Government as against the working-men.

It swore in trusty retainers as special constables (the German merchants
in Manchester took part in this ceremony, and marched in an entirely
superfluous manner through the city with their cigars in their mouths and
thick truncheons in their hands).  It gave the command to fire upon the
crowd in Preston, so that the unintentional revolt of the people stood
all at once face to face, not only with the whole military power of the
Government, but with the whole property-holding class as well.  The
working-men, who had no especial aim, separated gradually, and the
insurrection came to an end without evil results.  Later, the bourgeoisie
was guilty of one shameful act after another, tried to whitewash itself
by expressing a horror of popular violence by no means consistent with
its own revolutionary language of the spring; laid the blame of
insurrection upon Chartist instigators, whereas it had itself done more
than all of them together to bring about the uprising; and resumed its
old attitude of sanctifying the name of the law with a shamelessness
perfectly unequalled.  The Chartists, who were all but innocent of
bringing about this uprising, who simply did what the bourgeoisie meant
to do when they made the most of their opportunity, were prosecuted and
convicted, while the bourgeoisie escaped without loss, and had, besides,
sold off its old stock of goods with advantage during the pause in work.

The fruit of the uprising was the decisive separation of the proletariat
from the bourgeoisie.  The Chartists had not hitherto concealed their
determination to carry the Charter at all costs, even that of a
revolution; the bourgeoisie, which now perceived, all at once, the danger
with which any violent change threatened its position, refused to hear
anything further of physical force, and proposed to attain its end by
moral force, as though this were anything else than the direct or
indirect threat of physical force.  This was one point of dissension,
though even this was removed later by the assertion of the Chartists (who
are at least as worthy of being believed as the bourgeoisie) that they,
too, refrained from appealing to physical force.  The second point of
dissension and the main one, which brought Chartism to light in its
purity, was the repeal of the Corn Laws.  In this the bourgeoisie was
directly interested, the proletariat not.  The Chartists therefore
divided into two parties whose political programmes agreed literally, but
which were nevertheless thoroughly different and incapable of union.  At
the Birmingham National Convention, in January, 1843, Sturge, the
representative of the Radical bourgeoisie, proposed that the name of the
Charter be omitted from the rules of the Chartist Association, nominally
because this name had become connected with recollections of violence
during the insurrection, a connection, by the way, which had existed for
years, and against which Mr. Sturge had hitherto advanced no objection.
The working-men refused to drop the name, and when Mr. Sturge was
outvoted, that worthy Quaker suddenly became loyal, betook himself out of
the hall, and founded a "Complete Suffrage Association" within the
Radical bourgeoisie.  So repugnant had these recollections become to the
Jacobinical bourgeoisie, that he altered even the name Universal Suffrage
into the ridiculous title, Complete Suffrage.  The working-men laughed at
him and quietly went their way.

From this moment Chartism was purely a working-man's cause freed from all
bourgeois elements.  The "Complete" journals, the _Weekly Dispatch_,
_Weekly Chronicle_, _Examiner_, etc., fell gradually into the sleepy tone
of the other Liberal sheets, espoused the cause of Free Trade, attacked
the Ten Hours' Bill and all exclusively working-men's demands, and let
their Radicalism as a whole fall rather into the background.  The Radical
bourgeoisie joined hands with the Liberals against the working-men in
every collision, and in general made the Corn Law question, which for the
English is the Free Trade question, their main business.  They thereby
fell under the dominion of the Liberal bourgeoisie, and now play a most
pitiful role.

The Chartist working-men, on the contrary, espoused with redoubled zeal
all the struggles of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie.  Free
competition has caused the workers suffering enough to be hated by them;
its apostles, the bourgeoisie, are their declared enemies.  The working-
man has only disadvantages to await from the complete freedom of
competition.  The demands hitherto made by him, the Ten Hours' Bill,
protection of the workers against the capitalist, good wages, a
guaranteed position, repeal of the new Poor Law, all of the things which
belong to Chartism quite as essentially as the "Six Points," are directly
opposed to free competition and Free Trade.  No wonder, then, that the
working-men will not hear of Free Trade and the repeal of the Corn Laws
(a fact incomprehensible to the whole English bourgeoisie), and while at
least wholly indifferent to the Corn Law question, are most deeply
embittered against its advocates.  This question is precisely the point
at which the proletariat separates from the bourgeoisie, Chartism from
Radicalism; and the bourgeois understanding cannot comprehend this,
because it cannot comprehend the proletariat.

Therein lies the difference between Chartist democracy and all previous
political bourgeois democracy.  Chartism is of an essentially social
nature, a class movement.  The "Six Points" which for the Radical
bourgeois are the beginning and end of the matter, which are meant, at
the utmost, to call forth certain further reforms of the Constitution,
are for the proletarian a mere means to further ends.  "Political power
our means, social happiness our end," is now the clearly formulated war-
cry of the Chartists.  The "knife and fork question" of the preacher
Stephens was a truth for a part of the Chartists only, in 1838, it is a
truth for all of them in 1845.  There is no longer a mere politician
among the Chartists, and even though their Socialism is very little
developed, though their chief remedy for poverty has hitherto consisted
in the land-allotment system, which was superseded {235} by the
introduction of manufacture, though their chief practical propositions
are apparently of a reactionary nature, yet these very measures involve
the alternative that they must either succumb to the power of competition
once more and restore the old state of things, or they must themselves
entirely overcome competition and abolish it.  On the other hand, the
present indefinite state of Chartism, the separation from the purely
political party, involves that precisely the characteristic feature, its
social aspect, will have to be further developed.  The approach to
Socialism cannot fail, especially when the next crisis directs the
working-men by force of sheer want to social instead of political
remedies.  And a crisis must follow the present active state of industry
and commerce in 1847 at the latest, and probably in 1846; one, too, which
will far exceed in extent and violence all former crises.  The working-
men will carry their Charter, naturally; but meanwhile they will learn to
see clearly with regard to many points which they can make by means of it
and of which they now know very little.

Meanwhile the socialist agitation also goes forward.  English Socialism
comes under our consideration so far only as it affects the
working-class.  The English Socialists demand the gradual introduction of
possession in common in home colonies embracing two to three thousand
persons who shall carry on both agriculture and manufacture and enjoy
equal rights and equal education.  They demand greater facility of
obtaining divorce, the establishment of a rational government, with
complete freedom of conscience and the abolition of punishment, the same
to be replaced by a rational treatment of the offender.  These are their
practical measures, their theoretical principles do not concern us here.
English Socialism arose with Owen, a manufacturer, and proceeds therefore
with great consideration toward the bourgeoisie and great injustice
toward the proletariat in its methods, although it culminates in
demanding the abolition of the class antagonism between bourgeoisie and
proletariat.

The Socialists are thoroughly tame and peaceable, accept our existing
order, bad as it is, so far as to reject all other methods but that of
winning public opinion.  Yet they are so dogmatic that success by this
method is for them, and for their principles as at present formulated,
utterly hopeless.  While bemoaning the demoralisation of the lower
classes, they are blind to the element of progress in this dissolution of
the old social order, and refuse to acknowledge that the corruption
wrought by private interests and hypocrisy in the property-holding class
is much greater.  They acknowledge no historic development, and wish to
place the nation in a state of Communism at once, overnight, not by the
unavoidable march of its political development up to the point at which
this transition becomes both possible and necessary.  They understand, it
is true, why the working-man is resentful against the bourgeois, but
regard as unfruitful this class hatred, which is, after all, the only
moral incentive by which the worker can be brought nearer the goal.  They
preach instead, a philanthropy and universal love far more unfruitful for
the present state of England.  They acknowledge only a psychological
development, a development of man in the abstract, out of all relation to
the Past, whereas the whole world rests upon that Past, the individual
man included.  Hence they are too abstract, too metaphysical, and
accomplish little.  They are recruited in part from the working-class, of
which they have enlisted but a very small fraction representing, however,
its most educated and solid elements.  In its present form, Socialism can
never become the common creed of the working-class; it must condescend to
return for a moment to the Chartist standpoint.  But the true proletarian
Socialism having passed through Chartism, purified of its bourgeois
elements, assuming the form which it has already reached in the minds of
many Socialists and Chartist leaders (who are nearly all Socialists),
must, within a short time, play a weighty part in the history of the
development of the English people.  English Socialism, the basis of which
is much more ample than that of the French, is behind it in theoretical
development, will have to recede for a moment to the French standpoint in
order to proceed beyond it later.  Meanwhile the French, too, will
develop farther.  English Socialism affords the most pronounced
expression of the prevailing absence of religion among the working-men,
an expression so pronounced indeed that the mass of the working-men,
being unconsciously and merely practically irreligious, often draw back
before it.  But here, too, necessity will force the working-men to
abandon the remnants of a belief which, as they will more and more
clearly perceive, serves only to make them weak and resigned to their
fate, obedient and faithful to the vampire property-holding class.

Hence it is evident that the working-men's movement is divided into two
sections, the Chartists and the Socialists.  The Chartists are
theoretically the more backward, the less developed, but they are genuine
proletarians all over, the representatives of their class.  The
Socialists are more far-seeing, propose practical remedies against
distress, but, proceeding originally from the bourgeoisie, are for this
reason unable to amalgamate completely with the working-class.  The union
of Socialism with Chartism, the reproduction of French Communism in an
English manner, will be the next step, and has already begun.  Then only,
when this has been achieved, will the working-class be the true
intellectual leader of England.  Meanwhile, political and social
development will proceed, and will foster this new party, this new
departure of Chartism.

These different sections of working-men, often united, often separated,
Trades Unionists, Chartists, and Socialists, have founded on their own
hook numbers of schools and reading-rooms for the advancement of
education.  Every Socialist, and almost every Chartist institution, has
such a place, and so too have many trades.  Here the children receive a
purely proletarian education, free from all the influences of the
bourgeoisie; and, in the reading-rooms, proletarian journals and books
alone, or almost alone, are to be found.  These arrangements are very
dangerous for the bourgeoisie, which has succeeded in withdrawing several
such institutes, "Mechanics' Institutes," from proletarian influences,
and making them organs for the dissemination of the sciences useful to
the bourgeoisie.  Here the natural sciences are now taught, which may
draw the working-men away from the opposition to the bourgeoisie, and
perhaps place in their hands the means of making inventions which bring
in money for the bourgeoisie; while for the working-man the acquaintance
with the natural sciences is utterly useless _now_ when it too often
happens that he never gets the slightest glimpse of Nature in his large
town with his long working-hours.  Here Political Economy is preached,
whose idol is free competition, and whose sum and substance for the
working-man is this, that he cannot do anything more rational than resign
himself to starvation.  Here all education is tame, flabby, subservient
to the ruling politics and religion, so that for the working-man it is
merely a constant sermon upon quiet obedience, passivity, and resignation
to his fate.

The mass of working-men naturally have nothing to do with these
institutes, and betake themselves to the proletarian reading-rooms and to
the discussion of matters which directly concern their own interests,
whereupon the self-sufficient bourgeoisie says its _Dixi et Salvavi_, and
turns with contempt from a class which "prefers the angry ranting of ill-
meaning demagogues to the advantages of solid education."  That, however,
the working-men appreciate solid education when they can get it unmixed
with the interested cant of the bourgeoisie, the frequent lectures upon
scientific, aesthetic, and economic subjects prove which are delivered
especially in the Socialist institutes, and very well attended.  I have
often heard working-men, whose fustian jackets scarcely held together,
speak upon geological, astronomical, and other subjects, with more
knowledge than most "cultivated" bourgeois in Germany possess.  And in
how great a measure the English proletariat has succeeded in attaining
independent education is shown especially by the fact that the
epoch-making products of modern philosophical, political, and poetical
literature are read by working-men almost exclusively.  The bourgeois,
enslaved by social conditions and the prejudices involved in them,
trembles, blesses, and crosses himself before everything which really
paves the way for progress; the proletarian has open eyes for it, and
studies it with pleasure and success.  In this respect the Socialists,
especially, have done wonders for the education of the proletariat.  They
have translated the French materialists, Helvetius, Holbach, Diderot,
etc., and disseminated them, with the best English works, in cheap
editions.  Strauss' "Life of Jesus" and Proudhon's "Property" also
circulate among the working-men only.  Shelley, the genius, the prophet,
Shelley, and Byron, with his glowing sensuality and his bitter satire
upon our existing society, find most of their readers in the proletariat;
the bourgeoisie owns only castrated editions, family editions, cut down
in accordance with the hypocritical morality of to-day.  The two great
practical philosophers of latest date, Bentham and Godwin, are,
especially the latter, almost exclusively the property of the
proletariat; for though Bentham has a school within the Radical
bourgeoisie, it is only the proletariat and the Socialists who have
succeeded in developing his teachings a step forward.  The proletariat
has formed upon this basis a literature, which consists chiefly of
journals and pamphlets, and is far in advance of the whole bourgeois
literature in intrinsic worth.  On this point more later.

One more point remains to be noticed.  The factory operatives, and
especially those of the cotton district, form the nucleus of the labour
movement.  Lancashire, and especially Manchester, is the seat of the most
powerful Unions, the central point of Chartism, the place which numbers
most Socialists.  The more the factory system has taken possession of a
branch of industry, the more the working-men employed in it participate
in the labour movement; the sharper the opposition between working-men
and capitalists, the clearer the proletarian consciousness in the working-
men.  The small masters of Birmingham, though they suffer from the
crises, still stand upon an unhappy middle ground between proletarian
Chartism and shopkeepers' Radicalism.  But, in general, all the workers
employed in manufacture are won for one form or the other of resistance
to capital and bourgeoisie; and all are united upon this point, that
they, as working-men, a title of which they are proud, and which is the
usual form of address in Chartist meetings, form a separate class, with
separate interests and principles, with a separate way of looking at
things in contrast with that of all property owners; and that in this
class reposes the strength and the capacity of development of the nation.




THE MINING PROLETARIAT.


The production of raw materials and fuel for a manufacture so colossal as
that of England requires a considerable number of workers.  But of all
the materials needed for its industries (except wool, which belongs to
the agricultural districts), England produces only the minerals: the
metals and the coal.  While Cornwall possesses rich copper, tin, zinc,
and lead mines, Staffordshire, Wales, and other districts yield great
quantities of iron, and almost the whole North and West of England,
central Scotland, and certain districts of Ireland, produce a
superabundance of coal. {241}

In the Cornish mines about 19,000 men, and 11,000 women and children are
employed, in part above and in part below ground.  Within the mines below
ground, men and boys above twelve years old are employed almost
exclusively.  The condition of these workers seems, according to the
Children's Employment Commission's Reports, to be comparatively
endurable, materially, and the English often enough boast of their
strong, bold miners, who follow the veins of mineral below the bottom of
the very sea.  But in the matter of the health of these workers, this
same Children's Employment Commission's Report judges differently.  It
shows in Dr. Barham's intelligent report how the inhalation of an
atmosphere containing little oxygen, and mixed with dust and the smoke of
blasting powder, such as prevails in the mines, seriously affects the
lungs, disturbs the action of the heart, and diminishes the activity of
the digestive organs; that wearing toil, and especially the climbing up
and down of ladders, upon which even vigorous young men have to spend in
some mines more than an hour a day, and which precedes and follows daily
work, contributes greatly to the development of these evils, so that men
who begin this work in early youth are far from reaching the stature of
women who work above ground; that many die young of galloping
consumption, and most miners at middle age of slow consumption, that they
age prematurely and become unfit for work between the thirty-fifth and
forty-fifth years, that many are attacked by acute inflammations of the
respiratory organs when exposed to the sudden change from the warm air of
the shaft (after climbing the ladder in profuse perspiration), to the
cold wind above ground, and that these acute inflammations are very
frequently fatal.  Work above ground, breaking and sorting the ore, is
done by girls and children, and is described as very wholesome, being
done in the open air.

In the North of England, on the borders of Northumberland and Durham, are
the extensive lead mines of Alston Moor.  The reports from this district
{242} agree almost wholly with those from Cornwall.  Here, too, there are
complaints of want of oxygen, excessive dust, powder smoke, carbonic acid
gas, and sulphur, in the atmosphere of the workings.  In consequence, the
miners here, as in Cornwall, are small of stature, and nearly all suffer
from the thirtieth year throughout life from chest affections, which end,
especially when this work is persisted in, as is almost always the case,
in consumption, so greatly shortening the average of life of these
people.  If the miners of this district are somewhat longer lived than
those of Cornwall, this is the case, because they do not enter the mines
before reaching the nineteenth year, while in Cornwall, as we have seen,
this work is begun in the twelfth year.  Nevertheless, the majority die
here, too, between forty and fifty years of age, according to medical
testimony.  Of 79 miners, whose death was entered upon the public
register of the district, and who attained an average of 45 years, 37 had
died of consumption and 6 of asthma.  In the surrounding districts,
Allendale, Stanhope, and Middleton, the average length of life was 49,
48, and 47 years respectively, and the deaths from chest affections
composed 48, 54, and 56 per cent. of the whole number.  Let us compare
these figures with the so-called Swedish tables, detailed tables of
mortality embracing all the inhabitants of Sweden, and recognised in
England as the most correct standard hitherto attainable for the average
length of life of the British working-class.  According to them, male
persons who survive the nineteenth year attain an average of 57.5 years;
but, according to this, the North of England miners are robbed by their
work of an average of ten years of life.  Yet the Swedish tables are
accepted as the standard of longevity of the _workers_, and present,
therefore, the average chances of life as affected by the unfavourable
conditions in which the proletariat lives, a standard of longevity less
than the normal one.  In this district we find again the lodging-houses
and sleeping-places with which we have already become acquainted in the
towns, and in quite as filthy, disgusting, and overcrowded a state as
there.  Commissioner Mitchell visited one such sleeping barrack, 18 feet
long, 13 feet wide, and arranged for the reception of 42 men and 14 boys,
or 56 persons altogether, one-half of whom slept above the other in
berths as on shipboard.  There was no opening for the escape of the foul
air; and, although no one had slept in this pen for three nights
preceding the visit, the smell and the atmosphere were such that
Commissioner Mitchell could not endure it a moment.  What must it be
through a hot summer night, with fifty-six occupants?  And this is not
the steerage of an American slave ship, it is the dwelling of free-born
Britons!

Let us turn now to the most important branch of British mining, the iron
and coal mines, which the Children's Employment Commission treats in
common, and with all the detail which the importance of the subject
demands.  Nearly the whole of the first part of this report is devoted to
the condition of the workers employed in these mines.  After the detailed
description which I have furnished of the state of the industrial
workers, I shall, however, be able to be as brief in dealing with this
subject as the scope of the present work requires.

In the coal and iron mines which are worked in pretty much the same way,
children of four, five, and seven years are employed.  They are set to
transporting the ore or coal loosened by the miner from its place to the
horse-path or the main shaft, and to opening and shutting the doors
(which separate the divisions of the mine and regulate its ventilation)
for the passage of workers and material.  For watching the doors the
smallest children are usually employed, who thus pass twelve hours daily,
in the dark, alone, sitting usually in damp passages without even having
work enough to save them from the stupefying, brutalising tedium of doing
nothing.  The transport of coal and iron-stone, on the other hand, is
very hard labour, the stuff being shoved in large tubs, without wheels,
over the uneven floor of the mine; often over moist clay, or through
water, and frequently up steep inclines and through paths so low-roofed
that the workers are forced to creep on hands and knees.  For this more
wearing labour, therefore, older children and half-grown girls are
employed.  One man or two boys per tub are employed, according to
circumstances; and, if two boys, one pushes and the other pulls.  The
loosening of the ore or coal, which is done by men or strong youths of
sixteen years or more, is also very weary work.  The usual working-day is
eleven to twelve hours, often longer; in Scotland it reaches fourteen
hours, and double time is frequent, when all the employees are at work
below ground twenty-four, and even thirty-six hours at a stretch.  Set
times for meals are almost unknown, so that these people eat when hunger
and time permit.

The standard of living of the miners is in general described as fairly
good and their wages high in comparison with those of the agricultural
labourers surrounding them (who, however, live at starvation rates),
except in certain parts of Scotland and in the Irish mines, where great
misery prevails.  We shall have occasion to return later to this
statement, which, by the way, is merely relative, implying comparison to
the poorest class in all England.  Meanwhile, we shall consider the evils
which arise from the present method of mining, and the reader may judge
whether any pay in money can indemnify the miner for such suffering.

The children and young people who are employed in transporting coal and
iron-stone all complain of being over-tired.  Even in the most recklessly
conducted industrial establishments there is no such universal and
exaggerated overwork.  The whole report proves this, with a number of
examples on every page.  It is constantly happening that children throw
themselves down on the stone hearth or the floor as soon as they reach
home, fall asleep at once without being able to take a bite of food, and
have to be washed and put to bed while asleep; it even happens that they
lie down on the way home, and are found by their parents late at night
asleep on the road.  It seems to be a universal practice among these
children to spend Sunday in bed to recover in some degree from the over-
exertion of the week.  Church and school are visited by but few, and even
of these the teachers complain of their great sleepiness and the want of
all eagerness to learn.  The same thing is true of the elder girls and
women.  They are overworked in the most brutal manner.  This weariness,
which is almost always carried to a most painful pitch, cannot fail to
affect the constitution.  The first result of such over-exertion is the
diversion of vitality to the one-sided development of the muscles, so
that those especially of the arms, legs, and back, of the shoulders and
chest, which are chiefly called into activity in pushing and pulling,
attain an uncommonly vigorous development, while all the rest of the body
suffers and is atrophied from want of nourishment.  More than all else
the stature suffers, being stunted and retarded; nearly all miners are
short, except those of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, who work under
exceptionally favourable conditions.  Further, among boys as well as
girls, puberty is retarded, among the former often until the eighteenth
year; indeed, a nineteen years old boy appeared before Commissioner
Symonds, showing no evidence beyond that of the teeth, that he was more
than eleven or twelve years old.  This prolongation of the period of
childhood is at bottom nothing more than a sign of checked development,
which does not fail to bear fruit in later years.  Distortions of the
legs, knees bent inwards and feet bent outwards, deformities of the
spinal column and other malformations, appear the more readily in
constitutions thus weakened, in consequence of the almost universally
constrained position during work; and they are so frequent that in
Yorkshire and Lancashire, as in Northumberland and Durham, the assertion
is made by many witnesses, not only by physicians, that a miner may be
recognised by his shape among a hundred other persons.  The women seem to
suffer especially from this work, and are seldom, if ever, as straight as
other women.  There is testimony here, too, to the fact that deformities
of the pelvis and consequent difficult, even fatal, childbearing arise
from the work of women in the mines.  But apart from these local
deformities, the coal miners suffer from a number of special affections
easily explained by the nature of the work.  Diseases of the digestive
organs are first in order; want of appetite, pains in the stomach,
nausea, and vomiting, are most frequent, with violent thirst, which can
be quenched only with the dirty, lukewarm water of the mine; the
digestion is checked and all the other affections are thus invited.
Diseases of the heart, especially hypertrophy, inflammation of the heart
and pericardium, contraction of the _auriculo-ventricular_ communications
and the entrance of the _aorta_ are also mentioned repeatedly as diseases
of the miners, and are readily explained by overwork; and the same is
true of the almost universal rupture which is a direct consequence of
protracted over-exertion.  In part from the same cause and in part from
the bad, dust-filled atmosphere mixed with carbonic acid and hydrocarbon
gas, which might so readily be avoided, there arise numerous painful and
dangerous affections of the lungs, especially asthma, which in some
districts appears in the fortieth, in others in the thirtieth year in
most of the miners, and makes them unfit for work in a short time.  Among
those employed in wet workings the oppression in the chest naturally
appears much earlier; in some districts of Scotland between the twentieth
and thirtieth years, during which time the affected lungs are especially
susceptible to inflammations and diseases of a feverish nature.  The
peculiar disease of workers of this sort is "black spittle," which arises
from the saturation of the whole lung with coal particles, and manifests
itself in general debility, headache, oppression of the chest, and thick,
black mucous expectoration.  In some districts this disease appears in a
mild form; in others, on the contrary, it is wholly incurable, especially
in Scotland.  Here, besides the symptoms just mentioned, which appear in
an intensified form, short, wheezing, breathing, rapid pulse (exceeding
100 per minute), and abrupt coughing, with increasing leanness and
debility, speedily make the patient unfit for work.  Every case of this
disease ends fatally.  Dr. Mackellar, in Pencaitland, East Lothian,
testified that in all the coal mines which are properly ventilated this
disease is unknown, while it frequently happens that miners who go from
well to ill-ventilated mines are seized by it.  The profit-greed of mine
owners which prevents the use of ventilators is therefore responsible for
the fact that this working-men's disease exists at all.  Rheumatism, too,
is, with the exception of the Warwick and Leicestershire workers, a
universal disease of the coal miners, and arises especially from the
frequently damp working-places.  The consequence of all these diseases is
that, in all districts _without exception_, the coal miners age early and
become unfit for work soon after the fortieth year, though this is
different in different places.  A coal miner who can follow his calling
after the 45th or 50th year is a very great rarity indeed.  It is
universally recognised that such workers enter upon old age at forty.
This applies to those who loosen the coal from the bed; the loaders, who
have constantly to lift heavy blocks of coal into the tubs, age with the
twenty-eighth or thirtieth year, so that it is proverbial in the coal
mining districts that the loaders are old before they are young.  That
this premature old age is followed by the early death of the colliers is
a matter of course, and a man who reaches sixty is a great exception
among them.  Even in South Staffordshire, where the mines are
comparatively wholesome, few men reach their fifty-first year.  Along
with this early superannuation of the workers we naturally find, just as
in the case of the mills, frequent lack of employment of the elder men,
who are often supported by very young children.  If we sum up briefly the
results of the work in coal mines, we find, as Dr. Southwood Smith, one
of the commissioners, does, that through prolonged childhood on the one
hand and premature age on the other, that period of life in which the
human being is in full possession of his powers, the period of manhood,
is greatly shortened, while the length of life in general is below the
average.  This, too, on the debit side of the bourgeoisie's reckoning!

All this deals only with the average of the English coal mines.  But
there are many in which the state of things is much worse, those, namely,
in which thin seams of coal are worked.  The coal would be too expensive
if a part of the adjacent sand and clay were removed; so the mine owners
permit only the seams to be worked; whereby the passages which elsewhere
are four or five feet high and more are here kept so low that to stand
upright in them is not to be thought of.  The working-man lies on his
side and loosens the coal with his pick; resting upon his elbow as a
pivot, whence follow inflammations of the joint, and in cases where he is
forced to kneel, of the knee also.  The women and children who have to
transport the coal crawl upon their hands and knees, fastened to the tub
by a harness and chain (which frequently passes between the legs), while
a man behind pushes with hands and head.  The pushing with the head
engenders local irritations, painful swellings, and ulcers.  In many
cases, too, the shafts are wet, so that these workers have to crawl
through dirty or salt water several inches deep, being thus exposed to a
special irritation of the skin.  It can be readily imagined how greatly
the diseases already peculiar to the miners are fostered by this
especially frightful, slavish toil.

But these are not all the evils which descend upon the head of the coal
miner.  In the whole British Empire there is no occupation in which a man
may meet his end in so many diverse ways as in this one.  The coal mine
is the scene of a multitude of the most terrifying calamities, and these
come directly from the selfishness of the bourgeoisie.  The hydrocarbon
gas which develops so freely in these mines, forms, when combined with
atmospheric air, an explosive which takes fire upon coming into contact
with a flame, and kills every one within its reach.  Such explosions take
place, in one mine or another, nearly every day; on September 28th, 1844,
one killed 96 men in Haswell Colliery, Durham.  The carbonic acid gas,
which also develops in great quantities, accumulates in the deeper parts
of the mine, frequently reaching the height of a man, and suffocates
every one who gets into it.  The doors which separate the sections of the
mines are meant to prevent the propagation of explosions and the movement
of the gases; but since they are entrusted to small children, who often
fall asleep or neglect them, this means of prevention is illusory.  A
proper ventilation of the mines by means of fresh air-shafts could almost
entirely remove the injurious effects of both these gases.  But for this
purpose the bourgeoisie has no money to spare, preferring to command the
working-men to use the Davy lamp, which is wholly useless because of its
dull light, and is, therefore, usually replaced by a candle.  If an
explosion occurs, the recklessness of the miner is blamed, though the
bourgeois might have made the explosion well-nigh impossible by supplying
good ventilation.  Further, every few days the roof of a working falls
in, and buries or mangles the workers employed in it.  It is the interest
of the bourgeois to have the seams worked out as completely as possible,
and hence the accidents of this sort.  Then, too, the ropes by which the
men descend into the mines are often rotten, and break, so that the
unfortunates fall, and are crushed.  All these accidents, and I have no
room for special cases, carry off yearly, according to the _Mining
Journal_, some fourteen hundred human beings.  The _Manchester Guardian_
reports at least two or three accidents every week for Lancashire alone.
In nearly all mining districts the people composing the coroner's juries
are, in almost all cases, dependent upon the mine owners, and where this
is not the case, immemorial custom insures that the verdict shall be:
"Accidental Death."  Besides, the jury takes very little interest in the
state of the mine, because it does not understand anything about the
matter.  But the Children's Employment Commission does not hesitate to
make the mine owners directly responsible for the greater number of these
cases.

As to the education and morals of the mining population, they are,
according to the Children's Employment Commission, pretty good in
Cornwall, and excellent in Alston Moor; in the coal districts, in
general, they are, on the contrary, reported as on an excessively low
plane.  The workers live in the country in neglected regions, and if they
do their weary work, no human being outside the police force troubles
himself about them.  Hence, and from the tender age at which children are
put to work, it follows that their mental education is wholly neglected.
The day schools are not within their reach, the evening and Sunday
schools mere shams, the teachers worthless.  Hence, few can read and
still fewer write.  The only point upon which their eyes are as yet open
is the fact that their wages are far too low for their hateful and
dangerous work.  To church they go seldom or never; all the clergy
complain of their irreligion as beyond comparison.  As a matter of fact,
their ignorance of religious and of secular things, alike, is such that
the ignorance of the factory operatives, shown in numerous examples in
the foregoing pages, is trifling in comparison with it.  The categories
of religion are known to them only from the terms of their oaths.  Their
morality is destroyed by their work itself.  That the overwork of all
miners must engender drunkenness is self-evident.  As to their sexual
relations, men, women, and children work in the mines, in many cases,
wholly naked, and in most cases, nearly so, by reason of the prevailing
heat, and the consequences in the dark, lonely mines may be imagined.  The
number of illegitimate children is here disproportionately large, and
indicates what goes on among the half-savage population below ground; but
proves too, that the illegitimate intercourse of the sexes has not here,
as in the great cities, sunk to the level of prostitution.  The labour of
women entails the same consequences as in the factories, dissolves the
family, and makes the mother totally incapable of household work.

When the Children's Employment Commission's Report was laid before
Parliament, Lord Ashley hastened to bring in a bill wholly forbidding the
work of women in the mines, and greatly limiting that of children.  The
bill was adopted, but has remained a dead letter in most districts,
because no mine inspectors were appointed to watch over its being carried
into effect.  The evasion of the law is very easy in the country
districts in which the mines are situated; and no one need be surprised
that the Miners' Union laid before the Home Secretary an official notice,
last year, that in the Duke of Hamilton's coal mines in Scotland, more
than sixty women were at work; or that the _Manchester Guardian_ reported
that a girl perished in an explosion in a mine near Wigan, and no one
troubled himself further about the fact that an infringement of the law
was thus revealed.  In single cases the employment of women may have been
discontinued, but in general the old state of things remains as before.

These are, however, not all the afflictions known to the coal miners.  The
bourgeoisie, not content with ruining the health of these people, keeping
them in danger of sudden loss of life, robbing them of all opportunity
for education, plunders them in other directions in the most shameless
manner.  The truck system is here the rule, not the exception, and is
carried on in the most direct and undisguised manner.  The cottage
system, likewise, is universal, and here almost a necessity; but it is
used here, too, for the better plundering of the workers.  To these means
of oppression must be added all sorts of direct cheating.  While coal is
sold by weight, the worker's wages are reckoned chiefly by measure; and
when his tub is not perfectly full he receives no pay whatever, while he
gets not a farthing for over-measure.  If there is more than a specified
quantity of dust in the tub, a matter which depends much less upon the
miner than upon the nature of the seam, he not only loses his whole wage
but is fined besides.  The fine system in general is so highly perfected
in the coal mines, that a poor devil who has worked the whole week and
comes for his wages, sometimes learns from the overseer, who fine at
discretion and without summoning the workers, that he not only has no
wages but must pay so and so much in fines extra!  The overseer has, in
general, absolute power over wages; he notes the work done, and can
please himself as to what he pays the worker, who is forced to take his
word.  In some mines, where the pay is according to weight, false decimal
scales are used, whose weights are not subject to the inspection of the
authorities; in one coal mine there was actually a regulation that any
workman who intended to complain of the falseness of the scales _must
give notice to the overseer three weeks in advance_!  In many districts,
especially in the North of England, it is customary to engage the workers
by the year; they pledge themselves to work for no other employer during
that time, but the mine owner by no means pledges himself to give them
work, so that they are often without it for months together, and if they
seek elsewhere, they are sent to the treadmill for six weeks for breach
of contract.  In other contracts, work to the amount of 26s. every 14
days, is promised the miners, but not furnished, in others still, the
employers advance the miners small sums to be worked out afterwards, thus
binding the debtors to themselves.  In the North, the custom is general
of keeping the payment of wages one week behindhand, chaining the miners
in this way to their work.  And to complete the slavery of these
enthralled workers, nearly all the Justices of the Peace in the coal
districts are mine owners themselves, or relatives or friends of mine
owners, and possess almost unlimited power in these poor, uncivilised
regions where there are few newspapers, these few in the service of the
ruling class, and but little other agitation.  It is almost beyond
conception how these poor coal miners have been plundered and tyrannised
over by Justices of the Peace acting as judges in their own cause.

So it went on for a long time.  The workers did not know any better than
that they were there for the purpose of being swindled out of their very
lives.  But gradually, even among them, and especially in the factory
districts, where contact with the more intelligent operatives could not
fail of its effect, there arose a spirit of opposition to the shameless
oppression of the "coal kings."  The men began to form Unions and strike
from time to time.  In civilised districts they joined the Chartists body
and soul.  The great coal district of the North of England, shut off from
all industrial intercourse, remained backward until, after many efforts,
partly of the Chartists and partly of the more intelligent miners
themselves, a general spirit of opposition arose in 1843.  Such a
movement seized the workers of Northumberland and Durham that they placed
themselves at the forefront of a general Union of coal miners throughout
the kingdom, and appointed W. P. Roberts, a Chartist solicitor, of
Bristol, their "Attorney General," he having distinguished himself in
earlier Chartist trials.  The Union soon spread over a great majority of
the districts; agents were appointed in all directions, who held meetings
everywhere and secured new members; at the first conference of delegates,
in Manchester, in 1844, there were 60,000 members represented, and at
Glasgow, six months later, at the second conference, 100,000.  Here all
the affairs of the coal miners were discussed and decisions as to the
greater strikes arrived at.  Several journals were founded, especially
the _Miners' Advocate_, at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, for defending the rights
of the miners.  On March 31st, 1844, the contracts of all the miners of
Northumberland and Durham expired.  Roberts was empowered to draw up a
new agreement, in which the men demanded: (1) Payment by weight instead
of measure; (2) Determination of weight by means of ordinary scales
subject to the public inspectors; (3) Half-yearly renewal of contracts;
(4) Abolition of the fines system and payment according to work actually
done; (5) The employers to guarantee to miners in their exclusive service
at least four days' work per week, or wages for the same.  This agreement
was submitted to the "coal kings," and a deputation appointed to
negotiate with them; they answered, however, that for them the Union did
not exist, that they had to deal with single workmen only, and should
never recognise the Union.  They also submitted an agreement of their own
which ignored all the foregoing points, and was, naturally, refused by
the miners.  War was thus declared.  On March 31st, 1844, 40,000 miners
laid down their picks, and every mine in the county stood empty.  The
funds of the Union were so considerable that for several months a weekly
contribution of 2s. 6d. could be assured to each family.  While the
miners were thus putting the patience of their masters to the test,
Roberts organised with incomparable perseverance both strike and
agitation, arranged for the holding of meetings, traversed England from
one end to the other, preached peaceful and legal agitation, and carried
on a crusade against the despotic Justices of the Peace and truck
masters, such as had never been known in England.  This he had begun at
the beginning of the year.  Wherever a miner had been condemned by a
Justice of the Peace, he obtained a _habeas corpus_ from the Court of
Queen's bench, brought his client to London, and always secured an
acquittal.  Thus, January 13th, Judge Williams of Queen's bench acquitted
three miners condemned by the Justices of the Peace of Bilston, South
Staffordshire; the offence of these people was that they refused to work
in a place which threatened to cave in, and had actually caved in before
their return!  On an earlier occasion, Judge Patteson had acquitted six
working-men, so that the name Roberts began to be a terror to the mine
owners.  In Preston four of his clients were in jail.  In the first week
of January he proceeded thither to investigate the case on the spot, but
found, when he arrived, the condemned all released before the expiration
of the sentence.  In Manchester there were seven in jail; Roberts
obtained a _habeas corpus_ and acquittal for all from Judge Wightman.  In
Prescott nine coal miners were in jail, accused of creating a disturbance
in St. Helen's, South Lancashire, and awaiting trial; when Roberts
arrived upon the spot, they were released at once.  All this took place
in the first half of February.  In April, Roberts released a miner from
jail in Derby, four in Wakefield, and four in Leicester.  So it went on
for a time until these Dogberries came to have some respect for the
miners.  The truck system shared the same fate.  One after another
Roberts brought the disreputable mine owners before the courts, and
compelled the reluctant Justices of the Peace to condemn them; such dread
of this "lightning" "Attorney General" who seemed to be everywhere at
once spread among them, that at Belper, for instance, upon Roberts'
arrival, a truck firm published the following notice:

   "NOTICE!"

   "PENTRICH COAL MINE.

   "The Messrs. Haslam think it necessary, in order to prevent all
   mistakes, to announce that all persons employed in their colliery will
   receive their wages wholly in cash, and may expend them when and as
   they choose to do.  If they purchase goods in the shops of Messrs.
   Haslam they will receive them as heretofore at wholesale prices, but
   they are not expected to make their purchases there, and work and
   wages will be continued as usual whether purchases are made in these
   shops or elsewhere."

This triumph aroused the greatest jubilation throughout the English
working-class, and brought the Union a mass of new members.  Meanwhile
the strike in the North was proceeding.  Not a hand stirred, and
Newcastle, the chief coal port, was so stripped of its commodity that
coal had to be brought from the Scotch coast, in spite of the proverb.  At
first, while the Union's funds held out, all went well, but towards
summer the struggle became much more painful for the miners.  The
greatest want prevailed among them; they had no money, for the
contributions of the workers of all branches of industry in England
availed little among the vast number of strikers, who were forced to
borrow from the small shopkeepers at a heavy loss.  The whole press, with
the single exception of the few proletarian journals, was against them;
the bourgeois, even the few among them who might have had enough sense of
justice to support the miners, learnt from the corrupt Liberal and
Conservative sheets only lies about them.  A deputation of twelve miners
who went to London received a sum from the proletariat there, but this,
too, availed little among the mass who needed support.  Yet, in spite of
all this, the miners remained steadfast, and what is even more
significant, were quiet and peaceable in the face of all the hostilities
and provocation of the mine owners and their faithful servants.  No act
of revenge was carried out, not a renegade was maltreated, not one single
theft committed.  Thus the strike had continued well on towards four
months, and the mine owners still had no prospect of getting the upper
hand.  One way was, however, still open to them.  They remembered the
cottage system; it occurred to them that the houses of the rebellious
spirits were THEIR property.  In July, notice to quit was served the
workers, and, in a week, the whole forty thousand were put out of doors.
This measure was carried out with revolting cruelty.  The sick, the
feeble, old men and little children, even women in childbirth, were
mercilessly turned from their beds and cast into the roadside ditches.
One agent dragged by the hair from her bed, and into the street, a woman
in the pangs of childbirth.  Soldiers and police in crowds were present,
ready to fire at the first symptom of resistance, on the slightest hint
of the Justices of the Peace, who had brought about the whole brutal
procedure.  This, too, the working-men endured without resistance.  The
hope had been that the men would use violence; they were spurred on with
all force to infringements of the laws, to furnish an excuse for making
an end of the strike by the intervention of the military.  The homeless
miners, remembering the warnings of their Attorney General, remained
unmoved, set up their household goods upon the moors or the harvested
fields, and held out.  Some, who had no other place, encamped on the
roadsides and in ditches, others upon land belonging to other people,
whereupon they were prosecuted, and, having caused "damage of the value
of a halfpenny," were fined a pound, and, being unable to pay it, worked
it out on the treadmill.  Thus they lived eight weeks and more of the wet
fag-end of last summer under the open sky with their families, with no
further shelter for themselves and their little ones than the calico
curtains of their beds; with no other help than the scanty allowances of
their Union and the fast shrinking credit with the small dealers.
Hereupon Lord Londonderry, who owns considerable mines in Durham,
threatened the small tradesmen in "his" town of Seaham with his most high
displeasure if they should continue to give credit to "his" rebellious
workers.  This "noble" lord made himself the first clown of the turnout
in consequence of the ridiculous, pompous, ungrammatical ukases addressed
to the workers, which he published from time to time, with no other
result than the merriment of the nation.  When none of their efforts
produced any effect, the mine owners imported, at great expense, hands
from Ireland and such remote parts of Wales as have as yet no labour
movement.  And when the competition of workers against workers was thus
restored, the strength of the strikers collapsed.  The mine owners
obliged them to renounce the Union, abandon Roberts, and accept the
conditions laid down by the employers.  Thus ended at the close of
September the great five months' battle of the coal miners against the
mine owners, a battle fought on the part of the oppressed with an
endurance, courage, intelligence, and coolness which demands the highest
admiration.  What a degree of true human culture, of enthusiasm and
strength of character, such a battle implies on the part of men who, as
we have seen in the Children's Employment Commission's Report, were
described as late as 1840, as being thoroughly brutal and wanting in
moral sense!  But how hard, too, must have been the pressure which
brought these forty thousand colliers to rise as one man and to fight out
the battle like an army not only well-disciplined but enthusiastic, an
army possessed of one single determination, with the greatest coolness
and composure, to a point beyond which further resistance would have been
madness.  And what a battle!  Not against visible, mortal enemies, but
against hunger, want, misery, and homelessness, against their own
passions provoked to madness by the brutality of wealth.  If they had
revolted with violence, they, the unarmed and defenceless, would have
been shot down, and a day or two would have decided the victory of the
owners.  This law-abiding reserve was no fear of the constable's staff,
it was the result of deliberation, the best proof of the intelligence and
self-control of the working-men.

Thus were the working-men forced once more, in spite of their unexampled
endurance, to succumb to the might of capital.  But the fight had not
been in vain.  First of all, this nineteen weeks' strike had torn the
miners of the North of England forever from the intellectual death in
which they had hitherto lain; they have left their sleep, are alert to
defend their interests, and have entered the movement of civilisation,
and especially the movement of the workers.  The strike, which first
brought to light the whole cruelty of the owners, has established the
opposition of the workers here, forever, and made at least two-thirds of
them Chartists; and the acquisition of thirty thousand such determined,
experienced men is certainly of great value to the Chartists.  Then, too,
the endurance and law-abiding which characterised the whole strike,
coupled with the active agitation which accompanied it, has fixed public
attention upon the miners.  On the occasion of the debate upon the export
duty on coal, Thomas Duncombe, the only decidedly Chartist member of the
House of Commons, brought up the condition of the coal miners, had their
petition read, and by his speech forced the bourgeois journals to
publish, at least in their reports of Parliamentary proceedings, a
correct statement of the case.  Immediately after the strike, occurred
the explosion at Haswell; Roberts went to London, demanded an audience
with Peel, insisted as representative of the miners upon a thorough
investigation of the case, and succeeded in having the first geological
and chemical notabilities of England, Professors Lyell and Faraday,
commissioned to visit the spot.  As several other explosions followed in
quick succession, and Roberts again laid the details before the Prime
Minister, the latter promised to propose the necessary measures for the
protection of the workers, if possible, in the next session of
Parliament, _i.e_., the present one of 1845.  All this would not have
been accomplished if these workers had not, by means of the strike,
proved themselves freedom-loving men worthy of all respect, and if they
had not engaged Roberts as their counsel.

Scarcely had it become known that the coal miners of the North had been
forced to renounce the Union and discharge Roberts, when the miners of
Lancashire formed a Union of some ten thousand men, and guaranteed their
Attorney General a salary of 1200 pounds a year.  In the autumn of last
year they collected more than 700 pounds, rather more than 200 pounds of
which they expended upon salaries and judicial expenses, and the rest
chiefly in support of men out of work, either through want of employment
or through dissensions with their employers.  Thus the working-men are
constantly coming to see more clearly that, united, they too are a
respectable power, and can, in the last extremity, defy even the might of
the bourgeoisie.  And this insight, the gain of all labour movements, has
been won for all the miners of England by the Union and the strike of
1844.  In a very short time the difference of intelligence and energy
which now exists in favour of the factory operatives will have vanished,
and the miners of the kingdom will be able to stand abreast of them in
every respect.  Thus one piece of standing ground after another is
undermined beneath the feet of the bourgeoisie; and how long will it be
before their whole social and political edifice collapses with the basis
upon which it rests? {259}

But the bourgeoisie will not take warning.  The resistance of the miners
does but embitter it the more.  Instead of appreciating this forward step
in the general movement of the workers, the property-holding class saw in
it only a source of rage against a class of people who are fools enough
to declare themselves no longer submissive to the treatment they had
hitherto received.  It saw in the just demands of the non-possessing
workers only impertinent discontent, mad rebellion against "Divine and
human order;" and, in the best case, a success (to be resisted by the
bourgeoisie with all its might) won by "ill-intentioned demagogues who
live by agitation and are too lazy to work."  It sought, of course,
without success, to represent to the workers that Roberts and the Union's
agents whom the Union very naturally had to pay, were insolent swindlers,
who drew the last farthing from the working-men's pockets.  When such
insanity prevails in the property-holding class, when it is so blinded by
its momentary profit that it no longer has eyes for the most conspicuous
signs of the times, surely all hope of a peaceful solution of the social
question for England must be abandoned.  The only possible solution is a
violent revolution, which cannot fail to take place.




THE AGRICULTURAL PROLETARIAT.


We have seen in the introduction how, simultaneously with the small
bourgeoisie and the modest independence of the former workers, the small
peasantry also was ruined when the former Union of industrial and
agricultural work was dissolved, the abandoned fields thrown together
into large farms, and the small peasants superseded by the overwhelming
competition of the large farmers.  Instead of being landowners or
leaseholders, as they had been hitherto, they were now obliged to hire
themselves as labourers to the large farmers or the landlords.  For a
time this position was endurable, though a deterioration in comparison
with their former one.  The extension of industry kept pace with the
increase of population until the progress of manufacture began to assume
a slower pace, and the perpetual improvement of machinery made it
impossible for manufacture to absorb the whole surplus of the
agricultural population.  From this time forward, the distress which had
hitherto existed only in the manufacturing districts, and then only at
times, appeared in the agricultural districts too.  The twenty-five
years' struggle with France came to an end at about the same time; the
diminished production at the various seats of the wars, the shutting off
of imports, and the necessity of providing for the British army in Spain,
had given English agriculture an artificial prosperity, and had besides
withdrawn to the army vast numbers of workers from their ordinary
occupations.  This check upon the import trade, the opportunity for
exportation, and the military demand for workers, now suddenly came to an
end; and the necessary consequence was what the English call agricultural
distress.  The farmers had to sell their corn at low prices, and could,
therefore, pay only low wages.  In 1815, in order to keep up prices, the
Corn Laws were passed, prohibiting the importation of corn so long as the
price of wheat continued less than 80 shillings per quarter.  These
naturally ineffective laws were several times modified, but did not
succeed in ameliorating the distress in the agricultural districts.  All
that they did was to change the disease, which, under free competition
from abroad, would have assumed an acute form, culminating in a series of
crises, into a chronic one which bore heavily but uniformly upon the farm
labourers.

For a time after the rise of the agricultural proletariat, the
patriarchal relation between master and man, which was being destroyed
for manufacture, developed here the same relation of the farmer to his
hands which still exists almost everywhere in Germany.  So long as this
lasted, the poverty of the farm hands was less conspicuous; they shared
the fate of the farmer, and were discharged only in cases of the direst
necessity.  But now all this is changed.  The farm hands have become day
labourers almost everywhere, are employed only when needed by the
farmers, and, therefore, often have no work for weeks together,
especially in winter.  In the patriarchal time, the hands and their
families lived on the farm, and their children grew up there, the farmer
trying to find occupation on the spot for the oncoming generation; day
labourers, then, were the exception, not the rule.  Thus there was, on
every farm, a larger number of hands than were strictly necessary.  It
became, therefore, the interest of the farmers to dissolve this relation,
drive the farm hand from the farm, and transform him into a day labourer.
This took place pretty generally towards the year 1830, and the
consequence was that the hitherto latent over-population was set free,
the rate of wages forced down, and the poor-rate enormously increased.
From this time the agricultural districts became the headquarters of
permanent, as the manufacturing districts had long been of periodic,
pauperism; and the modification of the Poor Law was the first measure
which the State was obliged to apply to the daily increasing
impoverishment of the country parishes.  Moreover, the constant extension
of farming on a large scale, the introduction of threshing and other
machines, and the employment of women and children (which is now so
general that its effects have recently been investigated by a special
official commission), threw a large number of men out of employment.  It
is manifest, therefore, that here, too, the system of industrial
production has made its entrance, by means of farming on a large scale,
by the abolition of the patriarchal relation, which is of the greatest
importance just here, by the introduction of machinery, steam, and the
labour of women and children.  In so doing, it has swept the last and
most stationary portion of working humanity into the revolutionary
movement.  But the longer agriculture had remained stationary, the
heavier now became the burden upon the worker, the more violently broke
forth the results of the disorganisation of the old social fabric.  The
"over-population" came to light all at once, and could not, as in the
manufacturing districts, be absorbed by the needs of an increasing
production.  New factories could always be built, if there were consumers
for their products, but new land could not be created.  The cultivation
of waste common land was too daring a speculation for the bad times
following the conclusion of peace.  The necessary consequence was that
the competition of the workers among each other reached the highest point
of intensity, and wages fell to the minimum.  So long as the old Poor Law
existed, the workers received relief from the rates; wages naturally fell
still lower, because the farmers forced the largest possible number of
labourers to claim relief.  The higher poor-rate, necessitated by the
surplus population, was only increased by this measure, and the new Poor
Law, of which we shall have more to say later, was now enacted as a
remedy.  But this did not improve matters.  Wages did not rise, the
surplus population could not be got rid of, and the cruelty of the new
law did but serve to embitter the people to the utmost.  Even the poor-
rate, which diminished at first after the passage of the new law,
attained its old height after a few years.  Its only effect was that
whereas previously three to four million half paupers had existed, a
million of total paupers now appeared, and the rest, still half paupers,
merely went without relief.  The poverty in the agricultural districts
has increased every year.  The people live in the greatest want, whole
families must struggle along with 6, 7, or 8 shillings a week, and at
times have nothing.  Let us hear a description of this population given
by a Liberal member of Parliament as early as 1830. {264}

   "An English agricultural labourer and an English pauper, these words
   are synonymous.  His father was a pauper and his mother's milk
   contained no nourishment.  From his earliest childhood he had bad
   food, and only half enough to still his hunger, and even yet he
   undergoes the pangs of unsatisfied hunger almost all the time that he
   is not asleep.  He is half clad, and has not more fire than barely
   suffices to cook his scanty meal.  And so cold and damp are always at
   home with him, and leave him only in fine weather.  He is married, but
   he knows nothing of the joys of the husband and father.  His wife and
   children, hungry, rarely warm, often ill and helpless, always careworn
   and hopeless like himself, are naturally grasping, selfish, and
   troublesome, and so, to use his own expression, he hates the sight of
   them, and enters his cot only because it offers him a trifle more
   shelter from rain and wind than a hedge.  He must support his family,
   though he cannot do so, whence come beggary, deceit of all sorts,
   ending in fully developed craftiness.  If he were so inclined, he yet
   has not the courage which makes of the more energetic of his class
   wholesale poachers and smugglers.  But he pilfers when occasion
   offers, and teaches his children to lie and steal.  His abject and
   submissive demeanour towards his wealthy neighbours shows that they
   treat him roughly and with suspicion; hence he fears and hates them,
   but he never will injure them by force.  He is depraved through and
   through, too far gone to possess even the strength of despair.  His
   wretched existence is brief, rheumatism and asthma bring him to the
   workhouse, where he will draw his last breath without a single
   pleasant recollection, and will make room for another luckless wretch
   to live and die as he has done."

Our author adds that besides this class of agricultural labourers, there
is still another, somewhat more energetic and better endowed physically,
mentally, and morally; those, namely, who live as wretchedly, but were
not born to this condition.  These he represents as better in their
family life, but smugglers and poachers who get into frequent bloody
conflicts with the gamekeepers and revenue officers of the coast, become
more embittered against society during the prison life which they often
undergo, and so stand abreast of the first class in their hatred of the
property-holders.  "And," he says, in closing, "this whole class is
called, by courtesy, the bold peasantry of England."

Down to the present time, this description applies to the greater portion
of the agricultural labourers of England.  In June, 1844, the _Times_
sent a correspondent into the agricultural districts to report upon the
condition of this class, and the report which he furnished agreed wholly
with the foregoing.  In certain districts wages were not more than six
shillings a week; not more, that is, that in many districts in Germany,
while the prices of all the necessaries of life are at least twice as
high.  What sort of life these people lead may be imagined; their food
scanty and bad, their clothing ragged, their dwellings cramped and
desolate, small, wretched huts, with no comforts whatsoever; and, for
young people, lodging-houses, where men and women are scarcely separated,
and illegitimate intercourse thus provoked.  One or two days without work
in the course of a month must inevitably plunge such people into the
direst want.  Moreover, they cannot combine to raise wages, because they
are scattered, and if one alone refuses to work for low wages, there are
dozens out of work, or supported by the rates, who are thankful for the
most trifling offer, while to him who declines work, every other form of
relief than the hated workhouse is refused by the Poor Law guardians as
to a lazy vagabond; for the guardians are the very farmers from whom or
from whose neighbours and acquaintances alone he can get work.  And not
from one or two special districts of England do such reports come.  On
the contrary, the distress is general, equally great in the North and
South, the East and West.  The condition of the labourers in Suffolk and
Norfolk corresponds with that of Devonshire, Hampshire, and Sussex.  Wages
are as low in Dorsetshire and Oxfordshire as in Kent and Surrey,
Buckinghamshire and Cambridgeshire.

One especially barbaric cruelty against the working-class is embodied in
the Game Laws, which are more stringent than in any other country, while
the game is plentiful beyond all conception.  The English peasant who,
according to the old English custom and tradition, sees in poaching only
a natural and noble expression of courage and daring, is stimulated still
further by the contrast between his own poverty and the _car tel est
notre plaisir_ of the lord, who preserves thousands of hares and game
birds for his private enjoyment.  The labourer lays snares, or shoots
here and there a piece of game.  It does not injure the landlord as a
matter of fact, for he has a vast superfluity, and it brings the poacher
a meal for himself and his starving family.  But if he is caught he goes
to jail, and for a second offence receives at the least seven years'
transportation.  From the severity of these laws arise the frequent
bloody conflicts with the gamekeepers, which lead to a number of murders
every year Hence the post of gamekeeper is not only dangerous, but of ill-
repute and despised.  Last year, in two cases, gamekeepers shot
themselves rather than continue their work.  Such is the moderate price
at which the landed aristocracy purchases the noble sport of shooting;
but what does it matter to the lords of the soil?  Whether one or two
more or less of the "surplus" live or die matters nothing, and even if in
consequence of the Game Laws half the surplus population could be put out
of the way, it would be all the better for the other half--according to
the philanthropy of the English landlords.

Although the conditions of life in the country, the isolated dwellings,
the stability of the surroundings and occupations, and consequently of
the thoughts, are decidedly unfavourable to all development, yet poverty
and want bear their fruits even here.  The manufacturing and mining
proletariat emerged early from the first stage of resistance to our
social order, the direct rebellion of the individual by the perpetration
of crime; but the peasants are still in this stage at the present time.
Their favourite method of social warfare is incendiarism.  In the winter
which followed the Revolution of July, in 1830-31, these incendiarisms
first became general.  Disturbances had taken place, and the whole region
of Sussex and the adjacent counties has been brought into a state of
excitement in October, in consequence of an increase of the coastguard
(which made smuggling much more difficult and "ruined the coast"--in the
words of a farmer), changes in the Poor Law, low wages, and the
introduction of machinery.  In the winter the farmers' hay and
corn-stacks were burnt in the fields, and the very barns and stables
under their windows.  Nearly every night a couple of such fires blazed
up, and spread terror among the farmers and landlords.  The offenders
were rarely discovered, and the workers attributed the incendiarism to a
mythical person whom they named "Swing."  Men puzzled their brains to
discover who this Swing could be and whence this rage among the poor of
the country districts.  Of the great motive power, Want, Oppression, only
a single person here and there thought, and certainly no one in the
agricultural districts.  Since that year the incendiarisms have been
repeated every winter, with each recurring unemployed season of the
agricultural labourers.  In the winter of 1843-44, they were once more
extraordinarily frequent.  There lies before me a series of numbers of
the _Northern Star_ of that time, each one of which contains a report of
several incendiarisms, stating in each case its authority.  The numbers
wanting in the following list I have not at hand; but they, too,
doubtless contain a number of cases.  Moreover, such a sheet cannot
possibly ascertain all the cases which occur.  November 25th, 1843, two
cases; several earlier ones are discussed.  December 16th, in
Bedfordshire, general excitement for a fortnight past in consequence of
frequent incendiarisms, of which several take place every night.  Two
great farmhouses burnt down within the last few days; in Cambridgeshire
four great farmhouses, Hertfordshire one, and besides these, fifteen
other incendiarisms in different districts.  December 30th, in Norfolk
one, Suffolk two, Essex two, Cheshire one, Lancashire one, Derby,
Lincoln, and the South twelve.  January 6th, 1844, in all ten.  January
13th, seven.  January 20th, four incendiarisms.  From this time forward,
three or four incendiarisms per week are reported, and not as formerly
until the spring only, but far into July and August.  And that crimes of
this sort are expected to increase in the approaching hard season of 1844-
45, the English papers already indicate.

What do my readers think of such a state of things in the quiet, idyllic
country districts of England?  Is this social war, or is it not?  Is it a
natural state of things which can last?  Yet here the landlords and
farmers are as dull and stupefied, as blind to everything which does not
directly put money into their pockets, as the manufacturers and the
bourgeoisie in general in the manufacturing districts.  If the latter
promise their employees salvation through the repeal of the Corn Laws,
the landlords and a great part of the farmers promise theirs Heaven upon
earth from the maintenance of the same laws.  But in neither case do the
property-holders succeed in winning the workers to the support of their
pet hobby.  Like the operatives, the agricultural labourers are
thoroughly indifferent to the repeal or non-repeal of the Corn Laws.  Yet
the question is an important one for both.  That is to say--by the repeal
of the Corn Laws, free competition, the present social economy is carried
to its extreme point; all further development within the present order
comes to an end, and the only possible step farther is a radical
transformation of the social order. {268}  For the agricultural labourers
the question has, further, the following important bearing: Free
importation of corn involves (how, I cannot explain _here_) the
emancipation of the farmers from the landlords, their transformation into
Liberals.  Towards this consummation the Anti-Corn Law League has already
largely contributed, and this is its only real service.  When the farmers
become Liberals, _i.e_., conscious bourgeois, the agricultural labourers
will inevitably become Chartists and Socialists; the first change
involves the second.  And that a new movement is already beginning among
the agricultural labourers is proved by a meeting which Earl Radnor, a
Liberal landlord, caused to be held in October, 1844, near Highworth,
where his estates lie, to pass resolutions against the Corn Laws.  At
this meeting, the labourers, perfectly indifferent as to these laws,
demanded something wholly different, namely small holdings, at low rent,
for themselves, telling Earl Radnor all sorts of bitter truths to his
face.  Thus the movement of the working-class is finding its way into the
remote, stationary, mentally dead agricultural districts; and, thanks to
the general distress, will soon be as firmly rooted and energetic as in
the manufacturing districts. {269}  As to the religious state of the
agricultural labourers, they are, it is true, more pious than the
manufacturing operatives; but they, too, are greatly at odds with the
Church--for in these districts members of the Established Church almost
exclusively are to be found.  A correspondent of the _Morning Chronicle_,
who, over the signature, "One who has whistled at the plough," reports
his tour through the agricultural districts, relates, among other things,
the following conversation with some labourers after service: "I asked
one of these people whether the preacher of the day was their own
clergyman.  "Yes, blast him!  He is our own parson, and begs the whole
time.  He's been always a-begging as long as I've known him."  (The
sermon had been upon a mission to the heathen.)  "And as long as I've
known him too," added another; "and I never knew a parson but what was
begging for this or the other."  "Yes," said a woman, who had just come
out of the church, "and look how wages are going down, and see the rich
vagabonds with whom the parsons eat and drink and hunt.  So help me God,
we are more fit to starve in the workhouse than pay the parsons as go
among the heathen."  "And why," said another, "don't they send the
parsons as drones every day in Salisbury Cathedral, for nobody but the
bare stones?  Why don't _they_ go among the heathen?"  "They don't go,"
said the old man whom I had first asked, "because they are rich, they
have all the land they need, they want the money in order to get rid of
the poor parsons.  I know what they want.  I know them too long for
that."  "But, good friends," I asked, "you surely do not always come out
of the church with such bitter feelings towards the preacher?  Why do you
go at all?"  "What for do we go?" said the woman.  "We must, if we do not
want to lose everything, work and all, we must."  I learned later that
they had certain little privileges of fire-wood and potato land (which
they paid for!) on condition of going to church."  After describing their
poverty and ignorance, the correspondent closes by saying: "And now I
boldly assert that the condition of these people, their poverty, their
hatred of the church, their external submission and inward bitterness
against the ecclesiastical dignitaries, is the rule among the country
parishes of England, and its opposite is the exception."

If the peasantry of England shows the consequences which a numerous
agricultural proletariat in connection with large farming involves for
the country districts, Wales illustrates the ruin of the small holders.
If the English country parishes reproduce the antagonism between
capitalist and proletarian, the state of the Welsh peasantry corresponds
to the progressive ruin of the small bourgeoisie in the towns.  In Wales
are to be found, almost exclusively, small holders, who cannot with like
profit sell their products as cheaply as the larger, more favourably
situated English farmers, with whom, however, they are obliged to
compete.  Moreover, in some places the quality of the land admits of the
raising of live stock only, which is but slightly profitable.  Then, too,
these Welsh farmers, by reason of their separate nationality, which they
retain pertinaciously, are much more stationary than the English farmers.
But the competition among themselves and with their English neighbours
(and the increased mortgages upon their land consequent upon this) has
reduced them to such a state that they can scarcely live at all; and
because they have not recognised the true cause of their wretched
condition, they attribute it to all sorts of small causes, such as high
tolls, etc, which do check the development of agriculture and commerce,
but are taken into account as standing charges by every one who takes a
holding, and are therefore really ultimately paid by the landlord.  Here,
too, the new Poor Law is cordially hated by the tenants, who hover in
perpetual danger of coming under its sway.  In 1843, the famous "Rebecca"
disturbances broke out among the Welsh peasantry; the men dressed in
women's clothing, blackened their faces, and fell in armed crowds upon
the toll-gates, destroyed them amidst great rejoicing and firing of guns,
demolished the toll-keepers' houses, wrote threatening letters in the
name of the imaginary "Rebecca," and once went so far as to storm the
workhouse of Carmarthen.  Later, when the militia was called out and the
police strengthened, the peasants drew them off with wonderful skill upon
false scents, demolished toll-gates at one point while the militia, lured
by false signal bugles, was marching in some opposite direction; and
betook themselves finally, when the police was too thoroughly reinforced,
to single incendiarisms and attempts at murder.  As usual, these greater
crimes were the end of the movement.  Many withdrew from disapproval,
others from fear, and peace was restored of itself.  The Government
appointed a commission to investigate the affair and its causes, and
there was an end of the matter.  The poverty of the peasantry continues,
however, and will one day, since it cannot under existing circumstances
grow less, but must go on intensifying, produce more serious
manifestations than these humorous Rebecca masquerades.

If England illustrates the results of the system of farming on a large
scale and Wales on a small one, Ireland exhibits the consequences of
overdividing the soil.  The great mass of the population of Ireland
consists of small tenants who occupy a sorry hut without partitions, and
a potato patch just large enough to supply them most scantily with
potatoes through the winter.  In consequence of the great competition
which prevails among these small tenants, the rent has reached an unheard-
of height, double, treble, and quadruple that paid in England.  For every
agricultural labourer seeks to become a tenant-farmer, and though the
division of land has gone so far, there still remain numbers of labourers
in competition for plots.  Although in Great Britain 32,000,000 acres of
land are cultivated, and in Ireland but 14,000,000; although Great
Britain produces agricultural products to the value of 150,000,000
pounds, and Ireland of but 36,000,000 pounds, there are in Ireland 75,000
agricultural proletarians _more_ than in the neighbouring island. {272a}
How great the competition for land in Ireland must be is evident from
this extraordinary disproportion, especially when one reflects that the
labourers in Great Britain are living in the utmost distress.  The
consequence of this competition is that it is impossible for the tenants
to live much better than the labourers, by reason of the high rents paid.
The Irish people is thus held in crushing poverty, from which it cannot
free itself under our present social conditions.  These people live in
the most wretched clay huts, scarcely good enough for cattle-pens, have
scant food all winter long, or, as the report above quoted expresses it,
they have potatoes half enough thirty weeks in the year, and the rest of
the year nothing.  When the time comes in the spring at which this
provision reaches its end, or can no longer be used because of its
sprouting, wife and children go forth to beg and tramp the country with
their kettle in their hands.  Meanwhile the husband, after planting
potatoes for the next year, goes in search of work either in Ireland or
England, and returns at the potato harvest to his family.  This is the
condition in which nine-tenths of the Irish country folks live.  They are
poor as church mice, wear the most wretched rags, and stand upon the
lowest plane of intelligence possible in a half-civilised country.
According to the report quoted, there are, in a population of 8.5
millions, 585,000 heads of families in a state of total destitution; and
according to other authorities, cited by Sheriff Alison, {272b} there are
in Ireland 2,300,000 persons who could not live without public or private
assistance--or 27 per cent. of the whole population paupers!

The cause of this poverty lies in the existing social conditions,
especially in competition here found in the form of the subdivision of
the soil.  Much effort has been spent in finding other causes.  It has
been asserted that the relation of the tenant to the landlord who lets
his estate in large lots to tenants, who again have their sub-tenants,
and sub-sub-tenants, in turn, so that often ten middlemen come between
the landlord and the actual cultivator--it has been asserted that the
shameful law which gives the landlord the right of expropriating the
cultivator who may have paid his rent duly, if the first tenant fails to
pay the landlord, that this law is to blame for all this poverty.  But
all this determines only the form in which the poverty manifests itself.
Make the small tenant a landowner himself and what follows?  The majority
could not live upon their holdings even if they had no rent to pay, and
any slight improvement which might take place would be lost again in a
few years in consequence of the rapid increase of population.  The
children would then live to grow up under the improved conditions who now
die in consequence of poverty in early childhood.  From another side
comes the assertion that the shameless oppression inflicted by the
English is the cause of the trouble.  It is the cause of the somewhat
earlier appearance of this poverty, but not of the poverty itself.  Or
the blame is laid on the Protestant Church forced upon a Catholic nation;
but divide among the Irish what the Church takes from them, and it does
not reach six shillings a head.  Besides, tithes are a tax upon landed
property, not upon the tenant, though he may nominally pay them; now,
since the Commutation Bill of 1838, the landlord pays the tithes directly
and reckons so much higher rent, so that the tenant is none the better
off.  And in the same way a hundred other causes of this poverty are
brought forward, all proving as little as these.  This poverty is the
result of our social conditions; apart from these, causes may be found
for the manner in which it manifests itself, but not for the fact of its
existence.  That poverty manifests itself in Ireland thus and not
otherwise, is owing to the character of the people, and to their
historical development.  The Irish are a people related in their whole
character to the Latin nations, to the French, and especially to the
Italians.  The bad features of their character we have already had
depicted by Carlyle.  Let us now hear an Irishman, who at least comes
nearer to the truth than Carlyle, with his prejudice in favour of the
Teutonic character: {273}

   "They are restless, yet indolent, clever and indiscreet, stormy,
   impatient, and improvident; brave by instinct, generous without much
   reflection, quick to revenge and forgive insults, to make and to
   renounce friendships, gifted with genius prodigally, sparingly with
   judgment."

With the Irish, feeling and passion predominate; reason must bow before
them.  Their sensuous, excitable nature prevents reflection and quiet,
persevering activity from reaching development--such a nation is utterly
unfit for manufacture as now conducted.  Hence they held fast to
agriculture, and remained upon the lowest plane even of that.  With the
small subdivisions of land, which were not here artificially created, as
in France and on the Rhine, by the division of great estates, but have
existed from time immemorial, an improvement of the soil by the
investment of capital was not to be thought of; and it would, according
to Alison, require 120 million pounds sterling to bring the soil up to
the not very high state of fertility already attained in England.  The
English immigration, which might have raised the standard of Irish
civilisation, has contented itself with the most brutal plundering of the
Irish people; and while the Irish, by their immigration into England,
have furnished England a leaven which will produce its own results in the
future, they have little for which to be thankful to the English
immigration.

The attempts of the Irish to save themselves from their present ruin, on
the one hand, take the form of crimes.  These are the order of the day in
the agricultural districts, and are nearly always directed against the
most immediate enemies, the landlord's agents, or their obedient
servants, the Protestant intruders, whose large farms are made up of the
potato patches of hundreds of ejected families.  Such crimes are
especially frequent in the South and West.  On the other hand, the Irish
hope for relief by means of the agitation for the repeal of the
Legislative Union with England.  From all the foregoing, it is clear that
the uneducated Irish must see in the English their worst enemies; and
their first hope of improvement in the conquest of national independence.
But quite as clear is it, too, that Irish distress cannot be removed by
any Act of Repeal.  Such an Act would, however, at once lay bare the fact
that the cause of Irish misery, which now seems to come from abroad, is
really to be found at home.  Meanwhile, it is an open question whether
the accomplishment of repeal will be necessary to make this clear to the
Irish.  Hitherto, neither Chartism nor Socialism has had marked success
in Ireland.

I close my observations upon Ireland at this point the more readily, as
the Repeal Agitation of 1843 and O'Connell's trial have been the means of
making the Irish distress more and more known in Germany.

We have now followed the proletariat of the British Islands through all
branches of its activity, and found it everywhere living in want and
misery under totally inhuman conditions.  We have seen discontent arise
with the rise of the proletariat, grow, develop, and organise; we have
seen open bloodless and bloody battles of the proletariat against the
bourgeoisie.  We have investigated the principles according to which the
fate, the hopes, and fears of the proletariat are determined, and we have
found that there is no prospect of improvement in their condition.

We have had an opportunity, here and there, of observing the conduct of
the bourgeoisie towards the proletariat, and we have found that it
considers only itself, has only its own advantage in view.  However, in
order not to be unjust, let us investigate its mode of action somewhat
more exactly.




THE ATTITUDE OF THE BOURGEOISIE TOWARDS THE PROLETARIAT.


In speaking of the bourgeoisie I include the so-called aristocracy, for
this is a privileged class, an aristocracy, only in contrast with the
bourgeoisie, not in contrast with the proletariat.  The proletarian sees
in both only the property-holder--_i.e_., the bourgeois.  Before the
privilege of property all other privileges vanish.  The sole difference
is this, that the bourgeois proper stands in active relations with the
manufacturing, and, in a measure, with the mining proletarians, and, as
farmer, with the agricultural labourers, whereas the so-called aristocrat
comes into contact with the agricultural labourer only.

I have never seen a class so deeply demoralised, so incurably debased by
selfishness, so corroded within, so incapable of progress, as the English
bourgeoisie; and I mean by this, especially the bourgeoisie proper,
particularly the Liberal, Corn Law repealing bourgeoisie.  For it nothing
exists in this world, except for the sake of money, itself not excluded.
It knows no bliss save that of rapid gain, no pain save that of losing
gold. {276}  In the presence of this avarice and lust of gain, it is not
possible for a single human sentiment or opinion to remain untainted.
True, these English bourgeois are good husbands and family men, and have
all sorts of other private virtues, and appear, in ordinary intercourse,
as decent and respectable as all other bourgeois; even in business they
are better to deal with than the Germans; they do not higgle and haggle
so much as our own pettifogging merchants; but how does this help
matters?  Ultimately it is self-interest, and especially money gain,
which alone determines them.  I once went into Manchester with such a
bourgeois, and spoke to him of the bad, unwholesome method of building,
the frightful condition of the working-people's quarters, and asserted
that I had never seen so ill-built a city.  The man listened quietly to
the end, and said at the corner where we parted: "And yet there is a
great deal of money made here; good morning, sir."  It is utterly
indifferent to the English bourgeois whether his working-men starve or
not, if only he makes money.  All the conditions of life are measured by
money, and what brings no money is nonsense, unpractical, idealistic
bosh.  Hence, Political Economy, the Science of Wealth, is the favourite
study of these bartering Jews.  Every one of them is a Political
Economist.  The relation of the manufacturer to his operatives has
nothing human in it; it is purely economic.  The manufacturer is Capital,
the operative Labour.  And if the operative will not be forced into this
abstraction, if he insists that he is not Labour, but a man, who
possesses, among other things, the attribute of labour force, if he takes
it into his head that he need not allow himself to be sold and bought in
the market, as the commodity "Labour," the bourgeois reason comes to a
standstill.  He cannot comprehend that he holds any other relation to the
operatives than that of purchase and sale; he sees in them not human
beings, but hands, as he constantly calls them to their faces; he
insists, as Carlyle says, that "Cash Payment is the only nexus between
man and man."  Even the relation between himself and his wife is, in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, mere "Cash Payment."  Money
determines the worth of the man; he is "worth ten thousand pounds."  He
who has money is of "the better sort of people," is "influential," and
what _he_ does counts for something in his social circle.  The
huckstering spirit penetrates the whole language, all relations are
expressed in business terms, in economic categories.  Supply and demand
are the formulas according to which the logic of the English bourgeois
judges all human life.  Hence free competition in every respect, hence
the _regime_ of _laissez-faire, laissez-aller_ in government, in
medicine, in education, and soon to be in religion, too, as the State
Church collapses more and more.  Free competition will suffer no
limitation, no State supervision; the whole State is but a burden to it.
It would reach its highest perfection in a _wholly_ ungoverned anarchic
society, where each might exploit the other to his heart's content.
Since, however, the bourgeoisie cannot dispense with government, but must
have it to hold the equally indispensable proletariat in check, it turns
the power of government against the proletariat and keeps out of its way
as far as possible.

Let no one believe, however, that the "cultivated" Englishman openly
brags with his egotism.  On the contrary, he conceals it under the vilest
hypocrisy.  What?  The wealthy English fail to remember the poor?  They
who have founded philanthropic institutions, such as no other country can
boast of!  Philanthropic institutions forsooth!  As though you rendered
the proletarians a service in first sucking out their very life-blood and
then practising your self-complacent, Pharisaic philanthropy upon them,
placing yourselves before the world as mighty benefactors of humanity
when you give back to the plundered victims the hundredth part of what
belongs to them!  Charity which degrades him who gives more than him who
takes; charity which treads the downtrodden still deeper in the dust,
which demands that the degraded, the pariah cast out by society, shall
first surrender the last that remains to him, his very claim to manhood,
shall first beg for mercy before your mercy deigns to press, in the shape
of an alms, the brand of degradation upon his brow.  But let us hear the
English bourgeoisie's own words.  It is not yet a year since I read in
the _Manchester Guardian_ the following letter to the editor, which was
published without comment as a perfectly natural, reasonable thing:

   "MR. EDITOR,--For some time past our main streets are haunted by
   swarms of beggars, who try to awaken the pity of the passers-by in a
   most shameless and annoying manner, by exposing their tattered
   clothing, sickly aspect, and disgusting wounds and deformities.  I
   should think that when one not only pays the poor-rate, but also
   contributes largely to the charitable institutions, one had done
   enough to earn a right to be spared such disagreeable and impertinent
   molestations.  And why else do we pay such high rates for the
   maintenance of the municipal police, if they do not even protect us so
   far as to make it possible to go to or out of town in peace?  I hope
   the publication of these lines in your widely-circulated paper may
   induce the authorities to remove this nuisance; and I remain,--Your
   obedient servant,

   "A LADY."

There you have it!  The English bourgeoisie is charitable out of self-
interest; it gives nothing outright, but regards its gifts as a business
matter, makes a bargain with the poor, saying: "If I spend this much upon
benevolent institutions, I thereby purchase the right not to be troubled
any further, and you are bound thereby to stay in your dusky holes and
not to irritate my tender nerves by exposing your misery.  You shall
despair as before, but you shall despair unseen, this I require, this I
purchase with my subscription of twenty pounds for the infirmary!"  It is
infamous, this charity of a Christian bourgeois!  And so writes "A Lady;"
she does well to sign herself such, well that she has lost the courage to
call herself a woman!  But if the "Ladies" are such as this, what must
the "Gentlemen" be?  It will be said that this is a single case; but no,
the foregoing letter expresses the temper of the great majority of the
English bourgeoisie, or the editor would not have accepted it, and some
reply would have been made to it, which I watched for in vain in the
succeeding numbers.  And as to the efficiency of this philanthropy, Canon
Parkinson himself says that the poor are relieved much more by the poor
than by the bourgeoisie; and such relief given by an honest proletarian
who knows himself what it is to be hungry, for whom sharing his scanty
meal is really a sacrifice, but a sacrifice borne with pleasure, such
help has a wholly different ring to it from the carelessly-tossed alms of
the luxurious bourgeois.

In other respects, too, the bourgeoisie assumes a hypocritical, boundless
philanthropy, but only when its own interests require it; as in its
Politics and Political Economy.  It has been at work now well on towards
five years to prove to the working-men that it strives to abolish the
Corn Laws solely in their interest.  But the long and short of the matter
is this: the Corn Laws keep the price of bread higher than in other
countries, and thus raise wages, but these high wages render difficult
competition of the manufacturers against other nations in which bread,
and consequently wages, are cheaper.  The Corn Laws being repealed, the
price of bread falls, and wages gradually approach those of other
European countries, as must be clear to every one from our previous
exposition of the principles according to which wages are determined.  The
manufacturer can compete more readily, the demand for English goods
increases, and, with it, the demand for labour.  In consequence of this
increased demand wages would actually rise somewhat, and the unemployed
workers be re-employed; but for how long?  The "surplus population" of
England, and especially of Ireland, is sufficient to supply English
manufacture with the necessary operatives, even if it were doubled; and,
in a few years, the small advantage of the repeal of the Corn Laws would
be balanced, a new crisis would follow, and we should be back at the
point from which we started, while the first stimulus to manufacture
would have increased population meanwhile.  All this the proletarians
understand very well, and have told the manufacturers to their faces;
but, in spite of that, the manufacturers have in view solely the
immediate advantage which the Corn Laws would bring them.  They are too
narrow-minded to see that, even for themselves, no permanent advantage
can arise from this measure, because their competition with each other
would soon force the profit of the individual back to its old level; and
thus they continue to shriek to the working-men that it is purely for the
sake of the starving millions that the rich members of the Liberal party
pour hundreds and thousands of pounds into the treasury of the Anti-Corn
Law League, while every one knows that they are only sending the butter
after the cheese, that they calculate upon earning it all back in the
first ten years after the repeal of the Corn Laws.  But the workers are
no longer to be misled by the bourgeoisie, especially since the
insurrection of 1842.  They demand of every one who presents himself as
interested in their welfare, that he should declare himself in favour of
the People's Charter as proof of the sincerity of his professions, and in
so doing, they protest against all outside help, for the Charter is a
demand for the power to help themselves.  Whoever declines so to declare
himself they pronounce their enemy, and are perfectly right in so doing,
whether he be a declared foe or a false friend Besides, the Anti-Corn Law
League has used the most despicable falsehoods and tricks to win the
support of the workers.  It has tried to prove to them that the money
price of labour is in inverse proportion to the price of corn; that wages
are high when grain is cheap, and _vice versa_, an assertion which it
pretends to prove with the most ridiculous arguments, and one which is,
in itself, more ridiculous than any other that has proceeded from the
mouth of an Economist.  When this failed to help matters, the workers
were promised bliss supreme in consequence of the increased demand in the
labour market; indeed, men went so far as to carry through the streets
two models of loaves of bread, on one of which, by far the larger, was
written: "American Eightpenny Loaf, Wages Four Shillings per Day," and
upon the much smaller one: "English Eightpenny Loaf, Wages Two Shillings
a Day."  But the workers have not allowed themselves to be misled.  They
know their lords and masters too well.

But rightly to measure the hypocrisy of these promises, the practice of
the bourgeoisie must be taken into account.  We have seen in the course
of our report how the bourgeoisie exploits the proletariat in every
conceivable way for its own benefit!  We have, however, hitherto seen
only how the single bourgeois maltreats the proletariat upon his own
account.  Let us turn now to the manner in which the bourgeoisie as a
party, as the power of the State, conducts itself towards the
proletariat.  Laws are necessary only because there are persons in
existence who own nothing; and although this is directly expressed in but
few laws, as, for instance, those against vagabonds and tramps, in which
the proletariat as such is outlawed, yet enmity to the proletariat is so
emphatically the basis of the law that the judges, and especially the
Justices of the Peace, who are bourgeois themselves, and with whom the
proletariat comes most in contact, find this meaning in the laws without
further consideration.  If a rich man is brought up, or rather summoned,
to appear before the court, the judge regrets that he is obliged to
impose so much trouble, treats the matter as favourably as possible, and,
if he is forced to condemn the accused, does so with extreme regret, etc.
etc., and the end of it all is a miserable fine, which the bourgeois
throws upon the table with contempt and then departs.  But if a poor
devil gets into such a position as involves appearing before the Justice
of the Peace--he has almost always spent the night in the station-house
with a crowd of his peers--he is regarded from the beginning as guilty;
his defence is set aside with a contemptuous "Oh! we know the excuse,"
and a fine imposed which he cannot pay and must work out with several
months on the treadmill.  And if nothing can be proved against him, he is
sent to the treadmill, none the less, "as a rogue and a vagabond."  The
partisanship of the Justices of the Peace, especially in the country,
surpasses all description, and it is so much the order of the day that
all cases which are not too utterly flagrant are quietly reported by the
newspapers, without comment.  Nor is anything else to be expected.  For
on the one hand, these Dogberries do merely construe the law according to
the intent of the farmers, and, on the other, they are themselves
bourgeois, who see the foundation of all true order in the interests of
their class.  And the conduct of the police corresponds to that of the
Justices of the Peace.  The bourgeois may do what he will and the police
remain ever polite, adhering strictly to the law, but the proletarian is
roughly, brutally treated; his poverty both casts the suspicion of every
sort of crime upon him and cuts him off from legal redress against any
caprice of the administrators of the law; for him, therefore, the
protecting forms of the law do not exist, the police force their way into
his house without further ceremony, arrest and abuse him; and only when a
working-men's association, such as the miners, engages a Roberts, does it
become evident how little the protective side of the law exists for the
working-men, how frequently he has to bear all the burdens of the law
without enjoying its benefits.

Down to the present hour, the property-holding class in Parliament still
struggles against the better feelings of those not yet fallen a prey to
egotism, and seeks to subjugate the proletariat still further.  One piece
of common land after another is appropriated and placed under
cultivation, a process by which the general cultivation is furthered, but
the proletariat greatly injured.  Where there were still commons, the
poor could pasture an ass, a pig, or geese, the children and young people
had a place where they could play and live out of doors; but this is
gradually coming to an end.  The earnings of the worker are less, and the
young people, deprived of their playground, go to the beer-shops.  A mass
of acts for enclosing and cultivating commons is passed at every session
of Parliament.  When the Government determined during the session of 1844
to force the all monopolising railways to make travelling possible for
the workers by means of charges proportionate to their means, a penny a
mile, and proposed therefore to introduce such a third class train upon
every railway daily, the "Reverend Father in God," the Bishop of London,
proposed that Sunday, the only day upon which working-men in work _can_
travel, be exempted from this rule, and travelling thus be left open to
the rich and shut off from the poor.  This proposition was, however, too
direct, too undisguised to pass through Parliament, and was dropped.  I
have no room to enumerate the many concealed attacks of even one single
session upon the proletariat.  One from the session of 1844 must suffice.
An obscure member of Parliament, a Mr. Miles, proposed a bill regulating
the relation of master and servant which seemed comparatively
unobjectionable.  The Government became interested in the bill, and it
was referred to a committee.  Meanwhile the strike among the miners in
the North broke out, and Roberts made his triumphal passage through
England with his acquitted working-men.  When the bill was reported by
the committee, it was discovered that certain most despotic provisions
had been interpolated in it, especially one conferring upon the employer
the power to bring before any Justice of the Peace every working-man who
had contracted verbally or in writing to do any work whatsoever, in case
of refusal to work or other misbehaviour, and have him condemned to
prison with hard labour for two months, upon the oath of the employer or
his agent or overlooker, _i.e_., upon the oath of the accuser.  This bill
aroused the working-men to the utmost fury, the more so as the Ten Hours'
Bill was before Parliament at the same time, and had called forth a
considerable agitation.  Hundreds of meetings were held, hundreds of
working-men's petitions forwarded to London to Thomas Duncombe, the
representative of the interests of the proletariat.  This man was, except
Ferrand, the representative of "Young England," the only vigorous
opponent of the bill; but when the other Radicals saw that the people
were declaring against it, one after the other crept forward and took his
place by Duncombe's side; and as the Liberal bourgeoisie had not the
courage to defend the bill in the face of the excitement among the
working-men, it was ignominiously lost.

Meanwhile the most open declaration of war of the bourgeoisie upon the
proletariat is Malthus' Law of Population and the New Poor Law framed in
accordance with it.  We have already alluded several times to the theory
of Malthus.  We may sum up its final result in these few words, that the
earth is perennially over-populated, whence poverty, misery, distress,
and immorality must prevail; that it is the lot, the eternal destiny of
mankind, to exist in too great numbers, and therefore in diverse classes,
of which some are rich, educated, and moral, and others more or less
poor, distressed, ignorant, and immoral.  Hence it follows in practice,
and Malthus himself drew this conclusion, that charities and poor-rates
are, properly speaking, nonsense, since they serve only to maintain, and
stimulate the increase of, the surplus population whose competition
crushes down wages for the employed; that the employment of the poor by
the Poor Law Guardians is equally unreasonable, since only a fixed
quantity of the products of labour can be consumed, and for every
unemployed labourer thus furnished employment, another hitherto employed
must be driven into enforced idleness, whence private undertakings suffer
at cost of Poor Law industry; that, in other words, the whole problem is
not how to support the surplus population, but how to restrain it as far
as possible.  Malthus declares in plain English that the right to live, a
right previously asserted in favour of every man in the world, is
nonsense.  He quotes the words of a poet, that the poor man comes to the
feast of Nature and finds no cover laid for him, and adds that "she bids
him begone," for he did not before his birth ask of society whether or
not he is welcome.  This is now the pet theory of all genuine English
bourgeois, and very naturally, since it is the most specious excuse for
them, and has, moreover, a good deal of truth in it under existing
conditions.  If, then, the problem is not to make the "surplus
population" useful, to transform it into available population, but merely
to let it starve to death in the least objectionable way and to prevent
its having too many children, this, of course, is simple enough, provided
the surplus population perceives its own superfluousness and takes kindly
to starvation.  There is, however, in spite of the violent exertions of
the humane bourgeoisie, no immediate prospect of its succeeding in
bringing about such a disposition among the workers.  The workers have
taken it into their heads that they, with their busy hands, are the
necessary, and the rich capitalists, who do nothing, the surplus
population.

Since, however, the rich hold all the power, the proletarians must
submit, if they will not good-temperedly perceive it for themselves, to
have the law actually declare them superfluous.  This has been done by
the New Poor Law.  The Old Poor Law which rested upon the Act of 1601
(the 43rd of Elizabeth), naively started from the notion that it is the
duty of the parish to provide for the maintenance of the poor.  Whoever
had no work received relief, and the poor man regarded the parish as
pledged to protect him from starvation.  He demanded his weekly relief as
his right, not as a favour, and this became, at last, too much for the
bourgeoisie.  In 1833, when the bourgeoisie had just come into power
through the Reform Bill, and pauperism in the country districts had just
reached its full development, the bourgeoisie began the reform of the
Poor Law according to its own point of view.  A commission was appointed,
which investigated the administration of the Poor Laws, and revealed a
multitude of abuses.  It was discovered that the whole working-class in
the country was pauperised and more or less dependent upon the rates,
from which they received relief when wages were low; it was found that
this system by which the unemployed were maintained, the ill-paid and the
parents of large families relieved, fathers of illegitimate children
required to pay alimony, and poverty, in general, recognised as needing
protection, it was found that this system was ruining the nation, was--

   "A check upon industry, a reward for improvident marriage, a stimulus
   to increased population, and a means of counterbalancing the effect of
   an increased population upon wages; a national provision for
   discouraging the honest and industrious, and protecting the lazy,
   vicious, and improvident; calculated to destroy the bonds of family
   life, hinder systematically the accumulation of capital, scatter that
   which is already accumulated, and ruin the taxpayers.  Moreover, in
   the provision of aliment, it sets a premium upon illegitimate
   children."

(Words of the Report of the Poor Law Commissioners.) {286}  This
description of the action of the Old Poor Law is certainly correct;
relief fosters laziness and increase of "surplus population."  Under
present social conditions it is perfectly clear that the poor man is
compelled to be an egotist, and when he can choose, living equally well
in either case, he prefers doing nothing to working.  But what follows
therefrom?  That our present social conditions are good for nothing, and
not as the Malthusian Commissioners conclude, that poverty is a crime,
and, as such, to be visited with heinous penalties which may serve as a
warning to others.

But these wise Malthusians were so thoroughly convinced of the
infallibility of their theory that they did not for one moment hesitate
to cast the poor into the Procrustean bed of their economic notions and
treat them with the most revolting cruelty.  Convinced with Malthus and
the rest of the adherents of free competition that it is best to let each
one take care of himself, they would have preferred to abolish the Poor
Laws altogether.  Since, however, they had neither the courage nor the
authority to do this, they proposed a Poor Law constructed as far as
possible in harmony with the doctrine of Malthus, which is yet more
barbarous than that of _laissez-faire_, because it interferes actively in
cases in which the latter is passive.  We have seen how Malthus
characterises poverty, or rather the want of employment, as a crime under
the title "superfluity," and recommends for it punishment by starvation.
The commissioners were not quite so barbarous; death outright by
starvation was something too terrible even for a Poor Law Commissioner.
"Good," said they, "we grant you poor a right to exist, but only to
exist; the right to multiply you have not, nor the right to exist as
befits human beings.  You are a pest, and if we cannot get rid of you as
we do of other pests, you shall feel, at least, that you are a pest, and
you shall at least be held in check, kept from bringing into the world
other "surplus," either directly or through inducing in others laziness
and want of employment.  Live you shall, but live as an awful warning to
all those who might have inducements to become "superfluous."

They accordingly brought in the New Poor Law, which was passed by
Parliament in 1834, and continues in force down to the present day.  All
relief in money and provisions was abolished; the only relief allowed was
admission to the workhouses immediately built.  The regulations for these
workhouses, or, as the people call them, Poor Law Bastilles, is such as
to frighten away every one who has the slightest prospect of life without
this form of public charity.  To make sure that relief be applied for
only in the most extreme cases and after every other effort had failed,
the workhouse has been made the most repulsive residence which the
refined ingenuity of a Malthusian can invent.  The food is worse than
that of the most ill-paid working-man while employed, and the work
harder, or they might prefer the workhouse to their wretched existence
outside.  Meat, especially fresh meat, is rarely furnished, chiefly
potatoes, the worst possible bread and oatmeal porridge, little or no
beer.  The food of criminal prisoners is better, as a rule, so that the
paupers frequently commit some offence for the purpose of getting into
jail.  For the workhouse is a jail too; he who does not finish his task
gets nothing to eat; he who wishes to go out must ask permission, which
is granted or not, according to his behaviour or the inspector's whim,
tobacco is forbidden, also the receipt of gifts from relatives or friends
outside the house; the paupers wear a workhouse uniform, and are handed
over, helpless and without redress, to the caprice of the inspectors.  To
prevent their labour from competing with that of outside concerns, they
are set to rather useless tasks: the men break stones, "as much as a
strong man can accomplish with effort in a day;" the women, children, and
aged men pick oakum, for I know not what insignificant use.  To prevent
the "superfluous" from multiplying, and "demoralised" parents from
influencing their children, families are broken up, the husband is placed
in one wing, the wife in another, the children in a third, and they are
permitted to see one another only at stated times after long intervals,
and then only when they have, in the opinion of the officials, behaved
well.  And in order to shut off the external world from contamination by
pauperism within these bastilles, the inmates are permitted to receive
visits only with the consent of the officials, and in the
reception-rooms; to communicate in general with the world outside only by
leave and under supervision.

Yet the food is supposed to be wholesome and the treatment humane with
all this.  But the intent of the law is too loudly outspoken for this
requirement to be in any wise fulfilled.  The Poor Law Commissioners and
the whole English bourgeoisie deceive themselves if they believe the
administration of the law possible without these results.  The treatment,
which the letter of the law prescribes, is in direct contradiction of its
spirit.  If the law in its essence proclaims the poor criminals, the
workhouses prisons, their inmates beyond the pale of the law, beyond the
pale of humanity, objects of disgust and repulsion, then all commands to
the contrary are unavailing.  In practice, the spirit and not the letter
of the law is followed in the treatment of the poor, as in the following
few examples:

"In the workhouse at Greenwich, in the summer of 1843, a boy five years
old was punished by being shut into the dead-room, where he had to sleep
upon the lids of the coffins.  In the workhouse at Herne, the same
punishment was inflicted upon a little girl for wetting the bed at night,
and this method of punishment seems to be a favourite one.  This
workhouse, which stands in one of the most beautiful regions of Kent, is
peculiar, in so far as its windows open only upon the court, and but two,
newly introduced, afford the inmates a glimpse of the outer world.  The
author who relates this in the _Illuminated Magazine_, closes his
description with the words: "If God punished men for crimes as man
punishes man for poverty, then woe to the sons of Adam!"

In November, 1843, a man died at Leicester, who had been dismissed two
days before from the workhouse at Coventry.  The details of the treatment
of the poor in this institution are revolting.  The man, George Robson,
had a wound upon the shoulder, the treatment of which was wholly
neglected; he was set to work at the pump, using the sound arm; was given
only the usual workhouse fare, which he was utterly unable to digest by
reason of the unhealed wound and his general debility; he naturally grew
weaker, and the more he complained, the more brutally he was treated.
When his wife tried to bring him her drop of beer, she was reprimanded,
and forced to drink it herself in the presence of the female warder.  He
became ill, but received no better treatment.  Finally, at his own
request, and under the most insulting epithets, he was discharged,
accompanied by his wife.  Two days later he died at Leicester, in
consequence of the neglected wound and of the food given him, which was
utterly indigestible for one in his condition, as the surgeon present at
the inquest testified.  When he was discharged, there were handed to him
letters containing money, which had been kept back six weeks, and opened,
according to a rule of the establishment, by the inspector!  In
Birmingham such scandalous occurrences took place, that finally, in 1843,
an official was sent to investigate the case.  He found that four tramps
had been shut up naked under a staircase in a black hole, eight to ten
days, often deprived of food until noon, and that at the severest season
of the year.  A little boy had been passed through all grades of
punishment known to the institution; first locked up in a damp, vaulted,
narrow, lumber-room; then in the dog-hole twice, the second time three
days and three nights; then the same length of time in the old dog-hole,
which was still worse; then the tramp-room, a stinking, disgustingly
filthy hole, with wooden sleeping stalls, where the official, in the
course of his inspection, found two other tattered boys, shrivelled with
cold, who had been spending three days there.  In the dog-hole there were
often seven, and in the tramp-room, twenty men huddled together.  Women,
also, were placed in the dog-hole, because they refused to go to church;
and one was shut four days into the tramp-room, with God knows what sort
of company, and that while she was ill and receiving medicine!  Another
woman was placed in the insane department for punishment, though she was
perfectly sane.  In the workhouse at Bacton, in Suffolk, in January,
1844, a similar investigation revealed the fact that a feeble-minded
woman was employed as nurse, and took care of the patients accordingly;
while sufferers, who were often restless at night, or tried to get up,
were tied fast with cords passed over the covering and under the
bedstead, to save the nurses the trouble of sitting up at night.  One
patient was found dead, bound in this way.  In the St. Pancras workhouse
in London (where the cheap shirts already mentioned are made), an
epileptic died of suffocation during an attack in bed, no one coming to
his relief; in the same house, four to six, sometimes eight children,
slept in one bed.  In Shoreditch workhouse a man was placed, together
with a fever patient violently ill, in a bed teeming with vermin.  In
Bethnal Green workhouse, London, a woman in the sixth month of pregnancy
was shut up in the reception-room with her two-year-old child, from
February 28th to March 20th, without being admitted into the workhouse
itself, and without a trace of a bed or the means of satisfying the most
natural wants.  Her husband, who was brought into the workhouse, begged
to have his wife released from this imprisonment, whereupon he received
twenty-four hours imprisonment, with bread and water, as the penalty of
his insolence.  In the workhouse at Slough, near Windsor, a man lay dying
in September, 1844.  His wife journeyed to him, arriving at midnight; and
hastening to the workhouse, was refused admission.  She was not permitted
to see her husband until the next morning, and then only in the presence
of a female warder, who forced herself upon the wife at every succeeding
visit, sending her away at the end of half-an-hour.  In the workhouse at
Middleton, in Lancashire, twelve, and at times eighteen, paupers, of both
sexes, slept in one room.  This institution is not embraced by the New
Poor Law, but is administered under an old special act (Gilbert's Act).
The inspector had instituted a brewery in the house for his own benefit.
In Stockport, July 31st, 1844, a man, seventy-two years old, was brought
before the Justice of the Peace for refusing to break stones, and
insisting that, by reason of his age and a stiff knee, he was unfit for
his work.  In vain did he offer to undertake any work adapted to his
physical strength; he was sentenced to two weeks upon the treadmill.  In
the workhouse at Basford, an inspecting official found that the sheets
had not been changed in thirteen weeks, shirts in four weeks, stockings
in two to ten months, so that of forty-five boys but three had stockings,
and all their shirts were in tatters.  The beds swarmed with vermin, and
the tableware was washed in the slop-pails.  In the west of London
workhouse, a porter who had infected four girls with syphilis was not
discharged, and another who had concealed a deaf and dumb girl four days
and nights in his bed was also retained.

As in life, so in death.  The poor are dumped into the earth like
infected cattle.  The pauper burial-ground of St. Brides, London, is a
bare morass, in use as a cemetery since the time of Charles II., and
filled with heaps of bones; every Wednesday the paupers are thrown into a
ditch fourteen feet deep; a curate rattles through the Litany at the top
of his speed; the ditch is loosely covered in, to be re-opened the next
Wednesday, and filled with corpses as long as one more can be forced in.
The putrefaction thus engendered contaminates the whole neighbourhood.  In
Manchester, the pauper burial-ground lies opposite to the Old Town, along
the Irk: this, too, is a rough, desolate place.  About two years ago a
railroad was carried through it.  If it had been a respectable cemetery,
how the bourgeoisie and the clergy would have shrieked over the
desecration!  But it was a pauper burial-ground, the resting-place of the
outcast and superfluous, so no one concerned himself about the matter.  It
was not even thought worth while to convey the partially decayed bodies
to the other side of the cemetery; they were heaped up just as it
happened, and piles were driven into newly-made graves, so that the water
oozed out of the swampy ground, pregnant with putrefying matter, and
filled the neighbourhood with the most revolting and injurious gases.  The
disgusting brutality which accompanied this work I cannot describe in
further detail.

Can any one wonder that the poor decline to accept public relief under
these conditions?  That they starve rather than enter these bastilles?  I
have the reports of five cases in which persons actually starving, when
the guardians refused them outdoor relief, went back to their miserable
homes and died of starvation rather than enter these hells.  Thus far
have the Poor Law Commissioners attained their object.  At the same time,
however, the workhouses have intensified, more than any other measure of
the party in power, the hatred of the working-class against the property-
holders, who very generally admire the New Poor Law.

From Newcastle to Dover, there is but one voice among the workers--the
voice of hatred against the new law.  The bourgeoisie has formulated so
clearly in this law its conception of its duties towards the proletariat,
that it has been appreciated even by the dullest.  So frankly, so boldly
had the conception never yet been formulated, that the non-possessing
class exists solely for the purpose of being exploited, and of starving
when the property-holders can no longer make use of it.  Hence it is that
this new Poor Law has contributed so greatly to accelerate the labour
movement, and especially to spread Chartism; and, as it is carried out
most extensively in the country, it facilitates the development of the
proletarian movement which is arising in the agricultural districts.  Let
me add that a similar law in force in Ireland since 1838, affords a
similar refuge for eighty thousand paupers.  Here, too, it has made
itself disliked, and would have been intensely hated if it had attained
anything like the same importance as in England.  But what difference
does the ill-treatment of eighty thousand proletarians make in a country
in which there are two and a half millions of them?  In Scotland there
are, with local exceptions, no Poor Laws.

I hope that after this picture of the New Poor Law and its results, no
word which I have said of the English bourgeoisie will be thought too
stern.  In this public measure, in which it acts _in corpore_ as the
ruling power, it formulates its real intentions, reveals the animus of
those smaller transactions with the proletariat, of which the blame
apparently attaches to individuals.  And that this measure did not
originate with any one section of the bourgeoisie, but enjoys the
approval of the whole class, is proved by the Parliamentary debates of
1844.  The Liberal party had enacted the New Poor Law; the Conservative
party, with its Prime Minister Peel at the head, defends it, and only
alters some petty-fogging trifles in the Poor Law Amendment Bill of 1844.
A Liberal majority carried the bill, a Conservative majority approved it,
and the "Noble Lords" gave their consent each time.  Thus is the
expulsion of the proletariat from State and society outspoken, thus is it
publicly proclaimed that proletarians are not human beings, and do not
deserve to be treated as such.  Let us leave it to the proletarians of
the British Empire to re-conquer their human rights. {293}

Such is the state of the British working-class as I have come to know it
in the course of twenty-one months, through the medium of my own eyes,
and through official and other trustworthy reports.  And when I call this
condition, as I have frequently enough done in the foregoing pages, an
utterly unbearable one, I am not alone in so doing.  As early as 1833,
Gaskell declared that he despaired of a peaceful issue, and that a
revolution can hardly fail to follow.  In 1838, Carlyle explained
Chartism and the revolutionary activity of the working-men as arising out
of the misery in which they live, and only wondered that they have sat so
quietly eight long years at the Barmecide feast, at which they have been
regaled by the Liberal bourgeoisie with empty promises.  And in 1844 he
declared that the work of organising labour must be begun at once "if
Europe or at least England, is long to remain inhabitable."  And the
_Times_, the "first journal of Europe," said in June, 1844: "War to
palaces, peace unto cabins--that is a battle-cry of terror which may come
to resound throughout our country.  Let the wealthy beware!"

* * * * *

Meanwhile, let us review once more the chances of the English
bourgeoisie.  In the worst case, foreign manufacture, especially that of
America, may succeed in withstanding English competition, even after the
repeal of the Corn Laws, inevitable in the course of a few years.  German
manufacture is now making great efforts, and that of America has
developed with giant strides.  America, with its inexhaustible resources,
with its unmeasured coal and iron fields, with its unexampled wealth of
water-power and its navigable rivers, but especially with its energetic,
active population, in comparison with which the English are phlegmatic
dawdlers,--America has in less than ten years created a manufacture which
already competes with England in the coarser cotton goods, has excluded
the English from the markets of North and South America, and holds its
own in China, side by side with England.  If any country is adapted to
holding a monopoly of manufacture, it is America.  Should English
manufacture be thus vanquished--and in the course of the next twenty
years, if the present conditions remain unchanged, this is inevitable--the
majority of the proletariat must become forever superfluous, and has no
other choice than to starve or to rebel.  Does the English bourgeoisie
reflect upon this contingency?  On the contrary; its favourite economist,
M'Culloch, teaches from his student's desk, that a country so young as
America, which is not even properly populated, cannot carry on
manufacture successfully or dream of competing with an old manufacturing
country like England.  It were madness in the Americans to make the
attempt, for they could only lose by it; better far for them to stick to
their agriculture, and when they have brought their whole territory under
the plough, a time may perhaps come for carrying on manufacture with a
profit.  So says the wise economist, and the whole bourgeoisie worships
him, while the Americans take possession of one market after another,
while a daring American speculator recently even sent a shipment of
American cotton goods to England, where they were sold for
re-exportation!

But assuming that England retained the monopoly of manufactures, that its
factories perpetually multiply, what must be the result?  The commercial
crises would continue, and grow more violent, more terrible, with the
extension of industry and the multiplication of the proletariat.  The
proletariat would increase in geometrical proportion, in consequence of
the progressive ruin of the lower middle-class and the giant strides with
which capital is concentrating itself in the hands of the few; and the
proletariat would soon embrace the whole nation, with the exception of a
few millionaires.  But in this development there comes a stage at which
the proletariat perceives how easily the existing power may be
overthrown, and then follows a revolution.

Neither of these supposed conditions may, however, be expected to arise.
The commercial crises, the mightiest levers for all independent
development of the proletariat, will probably shorten the process, acting
in concert with foreign competition and the deepening ruin of the lower
middle-class.  I think the people will not endure more than one more
crisis.  The next one, in 1846 or 1847, will probably bring with it the
repeal of the Corn Laws {296} and the enactment of the Charter.  What
revolutionary movements the Charter may give rise to remains to be seen.
But, by the time of the next following crisis, which, according to the
analogy of its predecessors, must break out in 1852 or 1853, unless
delayed perhaps by the repeal of the Corn Laws or hastened by other
influences, such as foreign competition--by the time this crisis arrives,
the English people will have had enough of being plundered by the
capitalists and left to starve when the capitalists no longer require
their services.  If, up to that time, the English bourgeoisie does not
pause to reflect--and to all appearance it certainly will not do so--a
revolution will follow with which none hitherto known can be compared.
The proletarians, driven to despair, will seize the torch which Stephens
has preached to them; the vengeance of the people will come down with a
wrath of which the rage of 1793 gives no true idea.  The war of the poor
against the rich will be the bloodiest ever waged.  Even the union of a
part of the bourgeoisie with the proletariat, even a general reform of
the bourgeoisie, would not help matters.  Besides, the change of heart of
the bourgeoisie could only go as far as a lukewarm _juste-milieu_; the
more determined, uniting with the workers, would only form a new Gironde,
and succumb in the course of the mighty development.  The prejudices of a
whole class cannot be laid aside like an old coat: least of all, those of
the stable, narrow, selfish English bourgeoisie.  These are all
inferences which may be drawn with the greatest certainty: conclusions,
the premises for which are undeniable facts, partly of historical 
development, partly facts inherent in human nature.  Prophecy is nowhere
so easy as in England, where all the component elements of society are
clearly defined and sharply separated.  The revolution must come; it is
already too late to bring about a peaceful solution; but it can be made
more gentle than that prophesied in the foregoing pages.  This depends,
however, more upon the development of the proletariat than upon that of
the bourgeoisie.  In proportion, as the proletariat absorbs socialistic
and communistic elements, will the revolution diminish in bloodshed,
revenge, and savagery.  Communism stands, in principle, above the breach
between bourgeoisie and proletariat, recognises only its historic
significance for the present, but not its justification for the future:
wishes, indeed, to bridge over this chasm, to do away with all class
antagonisms.  Hence it recognises as justified, so long as the struggle
exists, the exasperation of the proletariat towards its oppressors as a
necessity, as the most important lever for a labour movement just
beginning; but it goes beyond this exasperation, because Communism is a
question of humanity and not of the workers alone.  Besides, it does not
occur to any Communist to wish to revenge himself upon individuals, or to
believe that, in general, the single bourgeois can act otherwise, under
existing circumstances, than he does act.  English Socialism, _i.e_.
Communism, rests directly upon the irresponsibility of the individual.
Thus the more the English workers absorb communistic ideas, the more
superfluous becomes their present bitterness, which, should it continue
so violent as at present, could accomplish nothing; and the more their
action against the bourgeoisie will lose its savage cruelty.  If, indeed,
it were possible to make the whole proletariat communistic before the war
breaks out, the end would be very peaceful; but that is no longer
possible, the time has gone by.  Meanwhile, I think that before the
outbreak of open, declared war of the poor against the rich, there will
be enough intelligent comprehension of the social question among the
proletariat, to enable the communistic party, with the help of events, to
conquer the brutal element of the revolution and prevent a "Ninth
Thermidor."  In any case, the experience of the French will not have been
undergone in vain, and most of the Chartist leaders are, moreover,
already Communists.  And as Communism stands above the strife between
bourgeoisie and proletariat, it will be easier for the better elements of
the bourgeoisie (which are, however, deplorably few, and can look for
recruits only among the rising generation) to unite with it than with
purely proletarian Chartism.

If these conclusions have not been sufficiently established in the course
of the present work, there may be other opportunities for demonstrating
that they are necessary consequences of the historical development of
England.  But this I maintain, the war of the poor against the rich now
carried on in detail and indirectly will become direct and universal.  It
is too late for a peaceful solution.  The classes are divided more and
more sharply, the spirit of resistance penetrates the workers, the
bitterness intensifies, the guerilla skirmishes become concentrated in
more important battles, and soon a slight impulse will suffice to set the
avalanche in motion.  Then, indeed, will the war-cry resound through the
land: "War to the palaces, peace to the cottages!"--but then it will be
too late for the rich to beware.
